## FIRST BOOK: EXISTENTIALISM IS HUMANISM

My purpose here is to offer a defence of existentialism against several reproaches that have been laid against it.
First, it has been reproached as an invitation to people to dwell in quietism of despair. For if every way to a solution is barred, one would have to regard any action in this world as entirely ineffective, and one would arrive finally at a contemplative philosophy. Moreover, since contemplation is a luxury, this would be only another bourgeois philosophy. This is, especially, the reproach made by the Communists.
From another quarter we are reproached for having underlined all that is ignominious in the human situation, for depicting what is mean, sordid or base to the neglect of certain things that possess charm and beauty and belong to the brighter side of human nature: for example, according to the Catholic critic, Mlle. Mercier, we forget how an infant smiles. Both from this side and from the other we are also reproached for leaving out of account the solidarity of mankind and considering man in isolation. And this, say the Communists, is because we base our doctrine upon pure subjectivity – upon the Cartesian “I think”: which is the moment in which solitary man attains to himself; a position from which it is impossible to regain solidarity with other men who exist outside of the self. The ego cannot reach them through the cogito.
From the Christian side, we are reproached as people who deny the reality and seriousness of human affairs. For since we ignore the commandments of God and all values prescribed as eternal, nothing remains but what is strictly voluntary. Everyone can do what he likes, and will be incapable, from such a point of view, of condemning either the point of view or the action of anyone else.
It is to these various reproaches that I shall endeavour to reply today; that is why I have entitled this brief exposition “Existentialism is a Humanism.” Many may be surprised at the mention of humanism in this connection, but we shall try to see in what sense we understand it. In any case, we can begin by saying that existentialism, in our sense of the word, is a doctrine that does render human life possible; a doctrine, also, which affirms that every truth and every action imply both an environment and a human subjectivity. The essential charge laid against us is, of course, that of over-emphasis upon the evil side of human life. I have lately been told of a lady who, whenever she lets slip a vulgar expression in a moment of nervousness, excuses herself by exclaiming, “I believe I am becoming an existentialist.” So it appears that ugliness is being identified with existentialism. That is why some people say we are “naturalistic,” and if we are, it is strange to see how much we scandalise and horrify them, for no one seems to be much frightened or humiliated nowadays by what is properly called naturalism. Those who can quite well keep down a novel by Zola such as La Terre are sickened as soon as they read an existentialist novel. Those who appeal to the wisdom of the people – which is a sad wisdom – find ours sadder still. And yet, what could be more disillusioned than such sayings as “Charity begins at home” or “Promote a rogue and he’ll sue you for damage, knock him down and he’ll do you homage”? We all know how many common sayings can be quoted to this effect, and they all mean much the same – that you must not oppose the powers that be; that you must not fight against superior force; must not meddle in matters that are above your station. Or that any action not in accordance with some tradition is mere romanticism; or that any undertaking which has not the support of proven experience is foredoomed to frustration; and that since experience has shown men to be invariably inclined to evil, there must be firm rules to restrain them, otherwise we shall have anarchy. It is, however, the people who are forever mouthing these dismal proverbs and, whenever they are told of some more or less repulsive action, say “How like human nature!” – it is these very people, always harping upon realism, who complain that existentialism is too gloomy a view of things. Indeed their excessive protests make me suspect that what is annoying them is not so much our pessimism, but, much more likely, our optimism. For at bottom, what is alarming in the doctrine that I am about to try to explain to you is – is it not? – that it confronts man with a possibility of choice. To verify this, let us review the whole question upon the strictly philosophic level. What, then, is this that we call existentialism?
Most of those who are making use of this word would be highly confused if required to explain its meaning. For since it has become fashionable, people cheerfully declare that this musician or that painter is “existentialist.” A columnist in Clartes signs himself “The Existentialist,” and, indeed, the word is now so loosely applied to so many things that it no longer means anything at all. It would appear that, for the lack of any novel doctrine such as that of surrealism, all those who are eager to join in the latest scandal or movement now seize upon this philosophy in which, however, they can find nothing to their purpose. For in truth this is of all teachings the least scandalous and the most austere: it is intended strictly for technicians and philosophers. All the same, it can easily be defined.
The question is only complicated because there are two kinds of existentialists. There are, on the one hand, the Christians, amongst whom I shall name Jaspers and Gabriel Marcel, both professed Catholics; and on the other the existential atheists, amongst whom we must place Heidegger as well as the French existentialists and myself. What they have in common is simply the fact that they believe that existence comes before essence – or, if you will, that we must begin from the subjective. What exactly do we mean by that?
If one considers an article of manufacture as, for example, a book or a paper-knife – one sees that it has been made by an artisan who had a conception of it; and he has paid attention, equally, to the conception of a paper-knife and to the pre-existent technique of production which is a part of that conception and is, at bottom, a formula. Thus the paper-knife is at the same time an article producible in a certain manner and one which, on the other hand, serves a definite purpose, for one cannot suppose that a man would produce a paper-knife without knowing what it was for. Let us say, then, of the paperknife that its essence – that is to say the sum of the formulae and the qualities which made its production and its definition possible – precedes its existence. The presence of such-and-such a paper-knife or book is thus determined before my eyes. Here, then, we are viewing the world from a technical standpoint, and we can say that production precedes existence.
When we think of God as the creator, we are thinking of him, most of the time, as a supernal artisan. Whatever doctrine we may be considering, whether it be a doctrine like that of Descartes, or of Leibnitz himself, we always imply that the will follows, more or less, from the understanding or at least accompanies it, so that when God creates he knows precisely what he is creating. Thus, the conception of man in the mind of God is comparable to that of the paper-knife in the mind of the artisan: God makes man according to a procedure and a conception, exactly as the artisan manufactures a paper-knife, following a definition and a formula. Thus each individual man is the realisation of a certain conception which dwells in the divine understanding. In the philosophic atheism of the eighteenth century, the notion of God is suppressed, but not, for all that, the idea that essence is prior to existence; something of that idea we still find everywhere, in Diderot, in Voltaire and even in Kant. Man possesses a human nature; that “human nature,” which is the conception of human being, is found in every man; which means that each man is a particular example of a universal conception, the conception of Man. In Kant, this universality goes so far that the wild man of the woods, man in the state of nature and the bourgeois are all contained in the same definition and have the same fundamental qualities. Here again, the essence of man precedes that historic existence which we confront in experience.
Atheistic existentialism, of which I am a representative, declares with greater consistency that if God does not exist there is at least one being whose existence comes before its essence, a being which exists before it can be defined by any conception of it. That being is man or, as Heidegger has it, the human reality. What do we mean by saying that existence precedes essence? We mean that man first of all exists, encounters himself, surges up in the world – and defines himself afterwards. If man as the existentialist sees him is not definable, it is because to begin with he is nothing. He will not be anything until later, and then he will be what he makes of himself. Thus, there is no human nature, because there is no God to have a conception of it. Man simply is. Not that he is simply what he conceives himself to be, but he is what he wills, and as he conceives himself after already existing – as he wills to be after that leap towards existence. Man is nothing else but that which he makes of himself. That is the first principle of existentialism. And this is what people call its “subjectivity,” using the word as a reproach against us. But what do we mean to say by this, but that man is of a greater dignity than a stone or a table? For we mean to say that man primarily exists – that man is, before all else, something which propels itself towards a future and is aware that it is doing so. Man is, indeed, a project which possesses a subjective life, instead of being a kind of moss, or a fungus or a cauliflower. Before that projection of the self nothing exists; not even in the heaven of intelligence: man will only attain existence when he is what he purposes to be. Not, however, what he may wish to be. For what we usually understand by wishing or willing is a conscious decision taken – much more often than not – after we have made ourselves what we are. I may wish to join a party, to write a book or to marry – but in such a case what is usually called my will is probably a manifestation of a prior and more spontaneous decision. If, however, it is true that existence is prior to essence, man is responsible for what he is. Thus, the first effect of existentialism is that it puts every man in possession of himself as he is, and places the entire responsibility for his existence squarely upon his own shoulders. And, when we say that man is responsible for himself, we do not mean that he is responsible only for his own individuality, but that he is responsible for all men. The word “subjectivism” is to be understood in two senses, and our adversaries play upon only one of them. Subjectivism means, on the one hand, the freedom of the individual subject and, on the other, that man cannot pass beyond human subjectivity. It is the latter which is the deeper meaning of existentialism. When we say that man chooses himself, we do mean that every one of us must choose himself; but by that we also mean that in choosing for himself he chooses for all men. For in effect, of all the actions a man may take in order to create himself as he wills to be, there is not one which is not creative, at the same time, of an image of man such as he believes he ought to be. To choose between this or that is at the same time to affirm the value of that which is chosen; for we are unable ever to choose the worse. What we choose is always the better; and nothing can be better for us unless it is better for all. If, moreover, existence precedes essence and we will to exist at the same time as we fashion our image, that image is valid for all and for the entire epoch in which we find ourselves. Our responsibility is thus much greater than we had supposed, for it concerns mankind as a whole. If I am a worker, for instance, I may choose to join a Christian rather than a Communist trade union. And if, by that membership, I choose to signify that resignation is, after all, the attitude that best becomes a man, that man’s kingdom is not upon this earth, I do not commit myself alone to that view. Resignation is my will for everyone, and my action is, in consequence, a commitment on behalf of all mankind. Or if, to take a more personal case, I decide to marry and to have children, even though this decision proceeds simply from my situation, from my passion or my desire, I am thereby committing not only myself, but humanity as a whole, to the practice of monogamy. I am thus responsible for myself and for all men, and I am creating a certain image of man as I would have him to be. In fashioning myself I fashion man.
This may enable us to understand what is meant by such terms – perhaps a little grandiloquent – as anguish, abandonment and despair. As you will soon see, it is very simple. First, what do we mean by anguish? – The existentialist frankly states that man is in anguish. His meaning is as follows: When a man commits himself to anything, fully realising that he is not only choosing what he will be, but is thereby at the same time a legislator deciding for the whole of mankind – in such a moment a man cannot escape from the sense of complete and profound responsibility. There are many, indeed, who show no such anxiety. But we affirm that they are merely disguising their anguish or are in flight from it. Certainly, many people think that in what they are doing they commit no one but themselves to anything: and if you ask them, “What would happen if everyone did so?” they shrug their shoulders and reply, “Everyone does not do so.” But in truth, one ought always to ask oneself what would happen if everyone did as one is doing; nor can one escape from that disturbing thought except by a kind of self-deception. The man who lies in self-excuse, by saying “Everyone will not do it” must be ill at ease in his conscience, for the act of lying implies the universal value which it denies. By its very disguise his anguish reveals itself. This is the anguish that Kierkegaard called “the anguish of Abraham.” You know the story: An angel commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son; and obedience was obligatory, if it really was an angel who had appeared and said, “Thou, Abraham, shalt sacrifice thy son.” But anyone in such a case would wonder, first, whether it was indeed an angel and secondly, whether I am really Abraham. Where are the proofs? A certain mad woman who suffered from hallucinations said that people were telephoning to her, and giving her orders. The doctor asked, “But who is it that speaks to you?” She replied: “He says it is God.” And what, indeed, could prove to her that it was God? If an angel appears to me, what is the proof that it is an angel; or, if I hear voices, who can prove that they proceed from heaven and not from hell, or from my own subconsciousness or some pathological condition? Who can prove that they are really addressed to me?
Who, then, can prove that I am the proper person to impose, by my own choice, my conception of man upon mankind? I shall never find any proof whatever; there will be no sign to convince me of it. If a voice speaks to me, it is still I myself who must decide whether the voice is or is not that of an angel. If I regard a certain course of action as good, it is only I who choose to say that it is good and not bad. There is nothing to show that I am Abraham: nevertheless I also am obliged at every instant to perform actions which are examples. Everything happens to every man as though the whole human race had its eyes fixed upon what he is doing and regulated its conduct accordingly. So every man ought to say, “Am I really a man who has the right to act in such a manner that humanity regulates itself by what I do.” If a man does not say that, he is dissembling his anguish. Clearly, the anguish with which we are concerned here is not one that could lead to quietism or inaction. It is anguish pure and simple, of the kind well known to all those who have borne responsibilities. When, for instance, a military leader takes upon himself the responsibility for an attack and sends a number of men to their death, he chooses to do it and at bottom he alone chooses. No doubt under a higher command, but its orders, which are more general, require interpretation by him and upon that interpretation depends the life of ten, fourteen or twenty men. In making the decision, he cannot but feel a certain anguish. All leaders know that anguish. It does not prevent their acting, on the contrary it is the very condition of their action, for the action presupposes that there is a plurality of possibilities, and in choosing one of these, they realize that it has value only because it is chosen. Now it is anguish of that kind which existentialism describes, and moreover, as we shall see, makes explicit through direct responsibility towards other men who are concerned. Far from being a screen which could separate us from action, it is a condition of action itself.
And when we speak of “abandonment” – a favorite word of Heidegger – we only mean to say that God does not exist, and that it is necessary to draw the consequences of his absence right to the end. The existentialist is strongly opposed to a certain type of secular moralism which seeks to suppress God at the least possible expense. Towards 1880, when the French professors endeavoured to formulate a secular morality, they said something like this: God is a useless and costly hypothesis, so we will do without it. However, if we are to have morality, a society and a law-abiding world, it is essential that certain values should be taken seriously; they must have an a priori existence ascribed to them. It must be considered obligatory a priori to be honest, not to lie, not to beat one’s wife, to bring up children and so forth; so we are going to do a little work on this subject, which will enable us to show that these values exist all the same, inscribed in an intelligible heaven although, of course, there is no God. In other words – and this is, I believe, the purport of all that we in France call radicalism – nothing will be changed if God does not exist; we shall rediscover the same norms of honesty, progress and humanity, and we shall have disposed of God as an out-of-date hypothesis which will die away quietly of itself. The existentialist, on the contrary, finds it extremely embarrassing that God does not exist, for there disappears with Him all possibility of finding values in an intelligible heaven. There can no longer be any good a priori, since there is no infinite and perfect consciousness to think it. It is nowhere written that “the good” exists, that one must be honest or must not lie, since we are now upon the plane where there are only men. Dostoevsky once wrote: “If God did not exist, everything would be permitted”; and that, for existentialism, is the starting point. Everything is indeed permitted if God does not exist, and man is in consequence forlorn, for he cannot find anything to depend upon either within or outside himself. He discovers forthwith, that he is without excuse. For if indeed existence precedes essence, one will never be able to explain one’s action by reference to a given and specific human nature; in other words, there is no determinism – man is free, man is freedom. Nor, on the other hand, if God does not exist, are we provided with any values or commands that could legitimise our behaviour. Thus we have neither behind us, nor before us in a luminous realm of values, any means of justification or excuse. – We are left alone, without excuse. That is what I mean when I say that man is condemned to be free. Condemned, because he did not create himself, yet is nevertheless at liberty, and from the moment that he is thrown into this world he is responsible for everything he does. The existentialist does not believe in the power of passion. He will never regard a grand passion as a destructive torrent upon which a man is swept into certain actions as by fate, and which, therefore, is an excuse for them. He thinks that man is responsible for his passion. Neither will an existentialist think that a man can find help through some sign being vouchsafed upon earth for his orientation: for he thinks that the man himself interprets the sign as he chooses. He thinks that every man, without any support or help whatever, is condemned at every instant to invent man. As Ponge has written in a very fine article, “Man is the future of man.” That is exactly true. Only, if one took this to mean that the future is laid up in Heaven, that God knows what it is, it would be false, for then it would no longer even be a future. If, however, it means that, whatever man may now appear to be, there is a future to be fashioned, a virgin future that awaits him – then it is a true saying. But in the present one is forsaken.
As an example by which you may the better understand this state of abandonment, I will refer to the case of a pupil of mine, who sought me out in the following circumstances. His father was quarrelling with his mother and was also inclined to be a “collaborator”; his elder brother had been killed in the German offensive of 1940 and this young man, with a sentiment somewhat primitive but generous, burned to avenge him. His mother was living alone with him, deeply afflicted by the semi-treason of his father and by the death of her eldest son, and her one consolation was in this young man. But he, at this moment, had the choice between going to England to join the Free French Forces or of staying near his mother and helping her to live. He fully realised that this woman lived only for him and that his disappearance – or perhaps his death – would plunge her into despair. He also realised that, concretely and in fact, every action he performed on his mother’s behalf would be sure of effect in the sense of aiding her to live, whereas anything he did in order to go and fight would be an ambiguous action which might vanish like water into sand and serve no purpose. For instance, to set out for England he would have to wait indefinitely in a Spanish camp on the way through Spain; or, on arriving in England or in Algiers he might be put into an office to fill up forms. Consequently, he found himself confronted by two very different modes of action; the one concrete, immediate, but directed towards only one individual; and the other an action addressed to an end infinitely greater, a national collectivity, but for that very reason ambiguous – and it might be frustrated on the way. At the same time, he was hesitating between two kinds of morality; on the one side the morality of sympathy, of personal devotion and, on the other side, a morality of wider scope but of more debatable validity. He had to choose between those two. What could help him to choose? Could the Christian doctrine? No. Christian doctrine says: Act with charity, love your neighbour, deny yourself for others, choose the way which is hardest, and so forth. But which is the harder road? To whom does one owe the more brotherly love, the patriot or the mother? Which is the more useful aim, the general one of fighting in and for the whole community, or the precise aim of helping one particular person to live? Who can give an answer to that a priori? No one. Nor is it given in any ethical scripture. The Kantian ethic says, Never regard another as a means, but always as an end. Very well; if I remain with my mother, I shall be regarding her as the end and not as a means: but by the same token I am in danger of treating as means those who are fighting on my behalf; and the converse is also true, that if I go to the aid of the combatants I shall be treating them as the end at the risk of treating my mother as a means. If values are uncertain, if they are still too abstract to determine the particular, concrete case under consideration, nothing remains but to trust in our instincts. That is what this young man tried to do; and when I saw him he said, “In the end, it is feeling that counts; the direction in which it is really pushing me is the one I ought to choose. If I feel that I love my mother enough to sacrifice everything else for her – my will to be avenged, all my longings for action and adventure then I stay with her. If, on the contrary, I feel that my love for her is not enough, I go.” But how does one estimate the strength of a feeling? The value of his feeling for his mother was determined precisely by the fact that he was standing by her. I may say that I love a certain friend enough to sacrifice such or such a sum of money for him, but I cannot prove that unless I have done it. I may say, “I love my mother enough to remain with her,” if actually I have remained with her. I can only estimate the strength of this affection if I have performed an action by which it is defined and ratified. But if I then appeal to this affection to justify my action, I find myself drawn into a vicious circle.
Moreover, as Gide has very well said, a sentiment which is play-acting and one which is vital are two things that are hardly distinguishable one from another. To decide that I love my mother by staying beside her, and to play a comedy the upshot of which is that I do so – these are nearly the same thing. In other words, feeling is formed by the deeds that one does; therefore I cannot consult it as a guide to action. And that is to say that I can neither seek within myself for an authentic impulse to action, nor can I expect, from some ethic, formulae that will enable me to act. You may say that the youth did, at least, go to a professor to ask for advice. But if you seek counsel – from a priest, for example you have selected that priest; and at bottom you already knew, more or less, what he would advise. In other words, to choose an adviser is nevertheless to commit oneself by that choice. If you are a Christian, you will say, consult a priest; but there are collaborationists, priests who are resisters and priests who wait for the tide to turn: which will you choose? Had this young man chosen a priest of the resistance, or one of the collaboration, he would have decided beforehand the kind of advice he was to receive. Similarly, in coming to me, he knew what advice I should give him, and I had but one reply to make. You are free, therefore choose, that is to say, invent. No rule of general morality can show you what you ought to do: no signs are vouchsafed in this world. The Catholics will reply, “Oh, but they are!” Very well; still, it is I myself, in every case, who have to interpret the signs. While I was imprisoned, I made the acquaintance of a somewhat remarkable man, a Jesuit, who had become a member of that order in the following manner. In his life he had suffered a succession of rather severe setbacks. His father had died when he was a child, leaving him in poverty, and he had been awarded a free scholarship in a religious institution, where he had been made continually to feel that he was accepted for charity’s sake, and, in consequence, he had been denied several of those distinctions and honours which gratify children. Later, about the age of eighteen, he came to grief in a sentimental affair; and finally, at twenty-two – this was a trifle in itself, but it was the last drop that overflowed his cup – he failed in his military examination. This young man, then, could regard himself as a total failure: it was a sign – but a sign of what? He might have taken refuge in bitterness or despair. But he took it – very cleverly for him – as a sign that he was not intended for secular success, and that only the attainments of religion, those of sanctity and of faith, were accessible to him. He interpreted his record as a message from God, and became a member of the Order. Who can doubt but that this decision as to the meaning of the sign was his, and his alone? One could have drawn quite different conclusions from such a series of reverses – as, for example, that he had better become a carpenter or a revolutionary. For the decipherment of the sign, however, he bears the entire responsibility. That is what “abandonment” implies, that we ourselves decide our being. And with this abandonment goes anguish.
As for “despair,” the meaning of this expression is extremely simple. It merely means that we limit ourselves to a reliance upon that which is within our wills, or within the sum of the probabilities which render our action feasible. Whenever one wills anything, there are always these elements of probability. If I am counting upon a visit from a friend, who may be coming by train or by tram, I presuppose that the train will arrive at the appointed time, or that the tram will not be derailed. I remain in the realm of possibilities; but one does not rely upon any possibilities beyond those that are strictly concerned in one’s action. Beyond the point at which the possibilities under consideration cease to affect my action, I ought to disinterest myself. For there is no God and no prevenient design, which can adapt the world and all its possibilities to my will. When Descartes said, “Conquer yourself rather than the world,” what he meant was, at bottom, the same – that we should act without hope.
Marxists, to whom I have said this, have answered: “Your action is limited, obviously, by your death; but you can rely upon the help of others. That is, you can count both upon what the others are doing to help you elsewhere, as in China and in Russia, and upon what they will do later, after your death, to take up your action and carry it forward to its final accomplishment which will be the revolution. Moreover you must rely upon this; not to do so is immoral.” To this I rejoin, first, that I shall always count upon my comrades-in-arms in the struggle, in so far as they are committed, as I am, to a definite, common cause; and in the unity of a party or a group which I can more or less control – that is, in which I am enrolled as a militant and whose movements at every moment are known to me. In that respect, to rely upon the unity and the will of the party is exactly like my reckoning that the train will run to time or that the tram will not be derailed. But I cannot count upon men whom I do not know, I cannot base my confidence upon human goodness or upon man’s interest in the good of society, seeing that man is free and that there is no human nature which I can take as foundational. I do not know where the Russian revolution will lead. I can admire it and take it as an example in so far as it is evident, today, that the proletariat plays a part in Russia which it has attained in no other nation. But I cannot affirm that this will necessarily lead to the triumph of the proletariat: I must confine myself to what I can see. Nor can I be sure that comrades-in-arms will take up my work after my death and carry it to the maximum perfection, seeing that those men are free agents and will freely decide, tomorrow, what man is then to be. Tomorrow, after my death, some men may decide to establish Fascism, and the others may be so cowardly or so slack as to let them do so. If so, Fascism will then be the truth of man, and so much the worse for us. In reality, things will be such as men have decided they shall be. Does that mean that I should abandon myself to quietism? No. First I ought to commit myself and then act my commitment, according to the time-honoured formula that “one need not hope in order to undertake one’s work.” Nor does this mean that I should not belong to a party, but only that I should be without illusion and that I should do what I can. For instance, if I ask myself “Will the social ideal as such, ever become a reality?” I cannot tell, I only know that whatever may be in my power to make it so, I shall do; beyond that, I can count upon nothing.
Quietism is the attitude of people who say, “let others do what I cannot do.” The doctrine I am presenting before you is precisely the opposite of this, since it declares that there is no reality except in action. It goes further, indeed, and adds, “Man is nothing else but what he purposes, he exists only in so far as he realises himself, he is therefore nothing else but the sum of his actions, nothing else but what his life is.” Hence we can well understand why some people are horrified by our teaching. For many have but one resource to sustain them in their misery, and that is to think, “Circumstances have been against me, I was worthy to be something much better than I have been. I admit I have never had a great love or a great friendship; but that is because I never met a man or a woman who were worthy of it; if I have not written any very good books, it is because I had not the leisure to do so; or, if I have had no children to whom I could devote myself it is because I did not find the man I could have lived with. So there remains within me a wide range of abilities, inclinations and potentialities, unused but perfectly viable, which endow me with a worthiness that could never be inferred from the mere history of my actions.” But in reality and for the existentialist, there is no love apart from the deeds of love; no potentiality of love other than that which is manifested in loving; there is no genius other than that which is expressed in works of art. The genius of Proust is the totality of the works of Proust; the genius of Racine is the series of his tragedies, outside of which there is nothing. Why should we attribute to Racine the capacity to write yet another tragedy when that is precisely what he did not write? In life, a man commits himself, draws his own portrait and there is nothing but that portrait. No doubt this thought may seem comfortless to one who has not made a success of his life. On the other hand, it puts everyone in a position to understand that reality alone is reliable; that dreams, expectations and hopes serve to define a man only as deceptive dreams, abortive hopes, expectations unfulfilled; that is to say, they define him negatively, not positively. Nevertheless, when one says, “You are nothing else but what you live,” it does not imply that an artist is to be judged solely by his works of art, for a thousand other things contribute no less to his definition as a man. What we mean to say is that a man is no other than a series of undertakings, that he is the sum, the organisation, the set of relations that constitute these undertakings.
In the light of all this, what people reproach us with is not, after all, our pessimism, but the sternness of our optimism. If people condemn our works of fiction, in which we describe characters that are base, weak, cowardly and sometimes even frankly evil, it is not only because those characters are base, weak, cowardly or evil. For suppose that, like Zola, we showed that the behaviour of these characters was caused by their heredity, or by the action of their environment upon them, or by determining factors, psychic or organic. People would be reassured, they would say, “You see, that is what we are like, no one can do anything about it.” But the existentialist, when he portrays a coward, shows him as responsible for his cowardice. He is not like that on account of a cowardly heart or lungs or cerebrum, he has not become like that through his physiological organism; he is like that because he has made himself into a coward by actions. There is no such thing as a cowardly temperament. There are nervous temperaments; there is what is called impoverished blood, and there are also rich temperaments. But the man whose blood is poor is not a coward for all that, for what produces cowardice is the act of giving up or giving way; and a temperament is not an action. A coward is defined by the deed that he has done. What people feel obscurely, and with horror, is that the coward as we present him is guilty of being a coward. What people would prefer would be to be born either a coward or a hero. One of the charges most often laid against the Chemins de la Liberté is something like this: “But, after all, these people being so base, how can you make them into heroes?” That objection is really rather comic, for it implies that people are born heroes: and that is, at bottom, what such people would like to think. If you are born cowards, you can be quite content, you can do nothing about it and you will be cowards all your lives whatever you do; and if you are born heroes you can again be quite content; you will be heroes all your lives eating and drinking heroically. Whereas the existentialist says that the coward makes himself cowardly, the hero makes himself heroic; and that there is always a possibility for the coward to give up cowardice and for the hero to stop being a hero. What counts is the total commitment, and it is not by a particular case or particular action that you are committed altogether.
We have now, I think, dealt with a certain number of the reproaches against existentialism. You have seen that it cannot be regarded as a philosophy of quietism since it defines man by his action; nor as a pessimistic description of man, for no doctrine is more optimistic, the destiny of man is placed within himself. Nor is it an attempt to discourage man from action since it tells him that there is no hope except in his action, and that the one thing which permits him to have life is the deed. Upon this level therefore, what we are considering is an ethic of action and self-commitment. However, we are still reproached, upon these few data, for confining man within his individual subjectivity. There again people badly misunderstand us.
Our point of departure is, indeed, the subjectivity of the individual, and that for strictly philosophic reasons. It is not because we are bourgeois, but because we seek to base our teaching upon the truth, and not upon a collection of fine theories, full of hope but lacking real foundations. And at the point of departure there cannot be any other truth than this, I think, therefore I am, which is the absolute truth of consciousness as it attains to itself. Every theory which begins with man, outside of this moment of self-attainment, is a theory which thereby suppresses the truth, for outside of the Cartesian cogito, all objects are no more than probable, and any doctrine of probabilities which is not attached to a truth will crumble into nothing. In order to define the probable one must possess the true. Before there can be any truth whatever, then, there must be an absolute truth, and there is such a truth which is simple, easily attained and within the reach of everybody; it consists in one’s immediate sense of one’s self.
In the second place, this theory alone is compatible with the dignity of man, it is the only one which does not make man into an object. All kinds of materialism lead one to treat every man including oneself as an object – that is, as a set of pre-determined reactions, in no way different from the patterns of qualities and phenomena which constitute a table, or a chair or a stone. Our aim is precisely to establish the human kingdom as a pattern of values in distinction from the material world. But the subjectivity which we thus postulate as the standard of truth is no narrowly individual subjectivism, for as we have demonstrated, it is not only one’s own self that one discovers in the cogito, but those of others too. Contrary to the philosophy of Descartes, contrary to that of Kant, when we say “I think” we are attaining to ourselves in the presence of the other, and we are just as certain of the other as we are of ourselves. Thus the man who discovers himself directly in the cogito also discovers all the others, and discovers them as the condition of his own existence. He recognises that he cannot be anything (in the sense in which one says one is spiritual, or that one is wicked or jealous) unless others recognise him as such. I cannot obtain any truth whatsoever about myself, except through the mediation of another. The other is indispensable to my existence, and equally so to any knowledge I can have of myself. Under these conditions, the intimate discovery of myself is at the same time the revelation of the other as a freedom which confronts mine, and which cannot think or will without doing so either for or against me. Thus, at once, we find ourselves in a world which is, let us say, that of “inter-subjectivity”. It is in this world that man has to decide what he is and what others are.
Furthermore, although it is impossible to find in each and every man a universal essence that can be called human nature, there is nevertheless a human universality of condition. It is not by chance that the thinkers of today are so much more ready to speak of the condition than of the nature of man. By his condition they understand, with more or less clarity, all the limitations which a priori define man’s fundamental situation in the universe. His historical situations are variable: man may be born a slave in a pagan society or may be a feudal baron, or a proletarian. But what never vary are the necessities of being in the world, of having to labor and to die there. These limitations are neither subjective nor objective, or rather there is both a subjective and an objective aspect of them. Objective, because we meet with them everywhere and they are everywhere recognisable: and subjective because they are lived and are nothing if man does not live them – if, that is to say, he does not freely determine himself and his existence in relation to them. And, diverse though man’s purpose may be, at least none of them is wholly foreign to me, since every human purpose presents itself as an attempt either to surpass these limitations, or to widen them, or else to deny or to accommodate oneself to them. Consequently every purpose, however individual it may be, is of universal value. Every purpose, even that of a Chinese, an Indian or a Negro, can be understood by a European. To say it can be understood, means that the European of 1945 may be striving out of a certain situation towards the same limitations in the same way, and that he may reconceive in himself the purpose of the Chinese, of the Indian or the African. In every purpose there is universality, in this sense that every purpose is comprehensible to every man. Not that this or that purpose defines man for ever, but that it may be entertained again and again. There is always some way of understanding an idiot, a child, a primitive man or a foreigner if one has sufficient information. In this sense we may say that there is a human universality, but it is not something given; it is being perpetually made. I make this universality in choosing myself; I also make it by understanding the purpose of any other man, of whatever epoch. This absoluteness of the act of choice does not alter the relativity of each epoch.
What is at the very heart and center of existentialism, is the absolute character of the free commitment, by which every man realises himself in realising a type of humanity – a commitment always understandable, to no matter whom in no matter what epoch – and its bearing upon the relativity of the cultural pattern which may result from such absolute commitment. One must observe equally the relativity of Cartesianism and the absolute character of the Cartesian commitment. In this sense you may say, if you like, that every one of us makes the absolute by breathing, by eating, by sleeping or by behaving in any fashion whatsoever. There is no difference between free being – being as self-committal, as existence choosing its essence – and absolute being. And there is no difference whatever between being as an absolute, temporarily localised that is, localised in history – and universally intelligible being.
This does not completely refute the charge of subjectivism. Indeed that objection appears in several other forms, of which the first is as follows. People say to us, “Then it does not matter what you do,” and they say this in various ways.
First they tax us with anarchy; then they say, “You cannot judge others, for there is no reason for preferring one purpose to another”; finally, they may say, “Everything being merely voluntary in this choice of yours, you give away with one hand what you pretend to gain with the other.” These three are not very serious objections. As to the first, to say that it does not matter what you choose is not correct. In one sense choice is possible, but what is not possible is not to choose. I can always choose, but I must know that if I do not choose, that is still a choice. This, although it may appear merely formal, is of great importance as a limit to fantasy and caprice. For, when I confront a real situation – for example, that I am a sexual being, able to have relations with a being of the other sex and able to have children – I am obliged to choose my attitude to it, and in every respect I bear the responsibility of the choice which, in committing myself, also commits the whole of humanity. Even if my choice is determined by no a priori value whatever, it can have nothing to do with caprice: and if anyone thinks that this is only Gide’s theory of the acte gratuit over again, he has failed to see the enormous difference between this theory and that of Gide. Gide does not know what a situation is, his “act” is one of pure caprice. In our view, on the contrary, man finds himself in an organised situation in which he is himself involved: his choice involves mankind in its entirety, and he cannot avoid choosing. Either he must remain single, or he must marry without having children, or he must marry and have children. In any case, and whichever he may choose, it is impossible for him, in respect of this situation, not to take complete responsibility. Doubtless he chooses without reference to any pre-established value, but it is unjust to tax him with caprice. Rather let us say that the moral choice is comparable to the construction of a work of art.
But here I must at once digress to make it quite clear that we are not propounding an aesthetic morality, for our adversaries are disingenuous enough to reproach us even with that. I mention the work of art only by way of comparison. That being understood, does anyone reproach an artist, when he paints a picture, for not following rules established a priori. Does one ever ask what is the picture that he ought to paint? As everyone knows, there is no pre-defined picture for him to make; the artist applies himself to the composition of a picture, and the picture that ought to be made is precisely that which he will have made. As everyone knows, there are no aesthetic values a priori, but there are values which will appear in due course in the coherence of the picture, in the relation between the will to create and the finished work. No one can tell what the painting of tomorrow will be like; one cannot judge a painting until it is done. What has that to do with morality? We are in the same creative situation. We never speak of a work of art as irresponsible; when we are discussing a canvas by Picasso, we understand very well that the composition became what it is at the time when he was painting it, and that his works are part and parcel of his entire life.
It is the same upon the plane of morality. There is this in common between art and morality, that in both we have to do with creation and invention. We cannot decide a priori what it is that should be done. I think it was made sufficiently clear to you in the case of that student who came to see me, that to whatever ethical system he might appeal, the Kantian or any other, he could find no sort of guidance whatever; he was obliged to invent the law for himself. Certainly we cannot say that this man, in choosing to remain with his mother – that is, in taking sentiment, personal devotion and concrete charity as his moral foundations – would be making an irresponsible choice, nor could we do so if he preferred the sacrifice of going away to England. Man makes himself; he is not found ready-made; he makes himself by the choice of his morality, and he cannot but choose a morality, such is the pressure of circumstances upon him. We define man only in relation to his commitments; it is therefore absurd to reproach us for irresponsibility in our choice.
In the second place, people say to us, “You are unable to judge others.” This is true in one sense and false in another. It is true in this sense, that whenever a man chooses his purpose and his commitment in all clearness and in all sincerity, whatever that purpose may be, it is impossible for him to prefer another. It is true in the sense that we do not believe in progress. Progress implies amelioration; but man is always the same, facing a situation which is always changing, and choice remains always a choice in the situation. The moral problem has not changed since the time when it was a choice between slavery and anti-slavery – from the time of the war of Secession, for example, until the present moment when one chooses between the M.R.P. [Mouvement Republicain Poputaire] and the Communists.
We can judge, nevertheless, for, as I have said, one chooses in view of others, and in view of others one chooses himself. One can judge, first – and perhaps this is not a judgment of value, but it is a logical judgment – that in certain cases choice is founded upon an error, and in others upon the truth. One can judge a man by saying that he deceives himself. Since we have defined the situation of man as one of free choice, without excuse and without help, any man who takes refuge behind the excuse of his passions, or by inventing some deterministic doctrine, is a self-deceiver. One may object: “But why should he not choose to deceive himself?” I reply that it is not for me to judge him morally, but I define his self-deception as an error. Here one cannot avoid pronouncing a judgment of truth. The self-deception is evidently a falsehood, because it is a dissimulation of man’s complete liberty of commitment. Upon this same level, I say that it is also a self-deception if I choose to declare that certain values are incumbent upon me; I am in contradiction with myself if I will these values and at the same time say that they impose themselves upon me. If anyone says to me, “And what if I wish to deceive myself?” I answer, “There is no reason why you should not, but I declare that you are doing so, and that the attitude of strict consistency alone is that of good faith.” Furthermore, I can pronounce a moral judgment. For I declare that freedom, in respect of concrete circumstances, can have no other end and aim but itself; and when once a man has seen that values depend upon himself, in that state of forsakenness he can will only one thing, and that is freedom as the foundation of all values. That does not mean that he wills it in the abstract: it simply means that the actions of men of good faith have, as their ultimate significance, the quest of freedom itself as such. A man who belongs to some communist or revolutionary society wills certain concrete ends, which imply the will to freedom, but that freedom is willed in community. We will freedom for freedom’s sake, in and through particular circumstances. And in thus willing freedom, we discover that it depends entirely upon the freedom of others and that the freedom of others depends upon our own. Obviously, freedom as the definition of a man does not depend upon others, but as soon as there is a commitment, I am obliged to will the liberty of others at the same time as my own. I cannot make liberty my aim unless I make that of others equally my aim. Consequently, when I recognise, as entirely authentic, that man is a being whose existence precedes his essence, and that he is a free being who cannot, in any circumstances, but will his freedom, at the same time I realize that I cannot not will the freedom of others. Thus, in the name of that will to freedom which is implied in freedom itself, I can form judgments upon those who seek to hide from themselves the wholly voluntary nature of their existence and its complete freedom. Those who hide from this total freedom, in a guise of solemnity or with deterministic excuses, I shall call cowards. Others, who try to show that their existence is necessary, when it is merely an accident of the appearance of the human race on earth – I shall call scum. But neither cowards nor scum can be identified except upon the plane of strict authenticity. Thus, although the content of morality is variable, a certain form of this morality is universal. Kant declared that freedom is a will both to itself and to the freedom of others. Agreed: but he thinks that the formal and the universal suffice for the constitution of a morality. We think, on the contrary, that principles that are too abstract break down when we come to defining action. To take once again the case of that student; by what authority, in the name of what golden rule of morality, do you think he could have decided, in perfect peace of mind, either to abandon his mother or to remain with her? There are no means of judging. The content is always concrete, and therefore unpredictable; it has always to be invented. The one thing that counts, is to know whether the invention is made in the name of freedom.
Let us, for example, examine the two following cases, and you will see how far they are similar in spite of their difference. Let us take The Mill on the Floss. We find here a certain young woman, Maggie Tulliver, who is an incarnation of the value of passion and is aware of it. She is in love with a young man, Stephen, who is engaged to another, an insignificant young woman. This Maggie Tulliver, instead of heedlessly seeking her own happiness, chooses in the name of human solidarity to sacrifice herself and to give up the man she loves. On the other hand, La Sanseverina in Stendhal’s Chartreuse de Parme, believing that it is passion which endows man with his real value, would have declared that a grand passion justifies its sacrifices, and must be preferred to the banality of such conjugal love as would unite Stephen to the little goose he was engaged to marry. It is the latter that she would have chosen to sacrifice in realising her own happiness, and, as Stendhal shows, she would also sacrifice herself upon the plane of passion if life made that demand upon her. Here we are facing two clearly opposed moralities; but I claim that they are equivalent, seeing that in both cases the overruling aim is freedom. You can imagine two attitudes exactly similar in effect, in that one girl might prefer, in resignation, to give up her lover while the other preferred, in fulfilment of sexual desire, to ignore the prior engagement of the man she loved; and, externally, these two cases might appear the same as the two we have just cited, while being in fact entirely different. The attitude of La Sanseverina is much nearer to that of Maggie Tulliver than to one of careless greed. Thus, you see, the second objection is at once true and false. One can choose anything, but only if it is upon the plane of free commitment.
The third objection, stated by saying, “You take with one hand what you give with the other,” means, at bottom, “your values are not serious, since you choose them yourselves.” To that I can only say that I am very sorry that it should be so; but if I have excluded God the Father, there must be somebody to invent values. We have to take things as they are. And moreover, to say that we invent values means neither more nor less than this; that there is no sense in life a priori. Life is nothing until it is lived; but it is yours to make sense of, and the value of it is nothing else but the sense that you choose. Therefore, you can see that there is a possibility of creating a human community. I have been reproached for suggesting that existentialism is a form of humanism: people have said to me, “But you have written in your Nausée that the humanists are wrong, you have even ridiculed a certain type of humanism, why do you now go back upon that?” In reality, the word humanism has two very different meanings. One may understand by humanism a theory which upholds man as the end-in-itself and as the supreme value. Humanism in this sense appears, for instance, in Cocteau’s story Round the World in 80 Hours, in which one of the characters declares, because he is flying over mountains in an airplane, “Man is magnificent!” This signifies that although I personally have not built aeroplanes, I have the benefit of those particular inventions and that I personally, being a man, can consider myself responsible for, and honoured by, achievements that are peculiar to some men. It is to assume that we can ascribe value to man according to the most distinguished deeds of certain men. That kind of humanism is absurd, for only the dog or the horse would be in a position to pronounce a general judgment upon man and declare that he is magnificent, which they have never been such fools as to do – at least, not as far as I know. But neither is it admissible that a man should pronounce judgment upon Man. Existentialism dispenses with any judgment of this sort: an existentialist will never take man as the end, since man is still to be determined. And we have no right to believe that humanity is something to which we could set up a cult, after the manner of Auguste Comte. The cult of humanity ends in Comtian humanism, shut-in upon itself, and – this must be said – in Fascism. We do not want a humanism like that.
But there is another sense of the word, of which the fundamental meaning is this: Man is all the time outside of himself: it is in projecting and losing himself beyond himself that he makes man to exist; and, on the other hand, it is by pursuing transcendent aims that he himself is able to exist. Since man is thus self-surpassing, and can grasp objects only in relation to his self-surpassing, he is himself the heart and center of his transcendence. There is no other universe except the human universe, the universe of human subjectivity. This relation of transcendence as constitutive of man (not in the sense that God is transcendent, but in the sense of self-surpassing) with subjectivity (in such a sense that man is not shut up in himself but forever present in a human universe) – it is this that we call existential humanism. This is humanism, because we remind man that there is no legislator but himself; that he himself, thus abandoned, must decide for himself; also because we show that it is not by turning back upon himself, but always by seeking, beyond himself, an aim which is one of liberation or of some particular realisation, that man can realize himself as truly human.
You can see from these few reflections that nothing could be more unjust than the objections people raise against us. Existentialism is nothing else but an attempt to draw the full conclusions from a consistently atheistic position. Its intention is not in the least that of plunging men into despair. And if by despair one means as the Christians do – any attitude of unbelief, the despair of the existentialists is something different. Existentialism is not atheist in the sense that it would exhaust itself in demonstrations of the non-existence of God. It declares, rather, that even if God existed that would make no difference from its point of view. Not that we believe God does exist, but we think that the real problem is not that of His existence; what man needs is to find himself again and to understand that nothing can save him from himself, not even a valid proof of the existence of God. In this sense existentialism is optimistic. It is a doctrine of action, and it is only by self-deception, by confining their own despair with ours that Christians can describe us as without hope.

## SECOND BOOK: BEING AND NOTHINGNESS

Modern thought has realized considerable progress by re- 
ducing the existent to the series of appearances which man- 
ifest it Its aim was to overcome a certain number of dualisms 
which have embarrassed philosophy and to replace them by 
the monism of the phenomenon. Has the attempt been 
successful? 

In the first place we certainly thus get rid of that dualism 
which in the existent opposes interior to exterior. There is no 
longer an exterior for the existent if one means by that a 
superficial covering which hides from sight the true nature 
of the object. And this true nature in turn, if it is to be the 
secret reality of the thing, which one can have a presentiment 
of or which one can suppose but can never reach because 
it is the “interior” of the object under consideration — 
this -nature no longer exists. The appearances which manifest 
the existent are neither interior nor exterior; they are all 
^ual, they all refer to other appearances, and none of them 
is privileged. Force, for example, is not a metaphysical conatus 
of an unknown kind which hides behind its effects (accelera- 
tions, deviations, etc.); it is the totality of these effects. 
Similarly an electric current does not have a secret reverse 
side; it is nothing but the totality of the physical-chemical 
actions which manifest it (electrolysis, the incandescence of 


3 


4 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

a carbon filament, the displacement of the needle of a gal- 
vanometer, Btc.'). No one of these actions alone is sufficient to 
reveal it. But no action indicates anything which is behind 
itself; it indicates only itself and the total series. 

The obvious conclusion is that the dualism of being and 
appearance is no longer entitled to any legal status within 
philosophy. The appearance refers to the total series of appear- 
ances and not to a hidden reality which would drain to itself 
all the being of the existent. And the appearance for its part 
is not an inconsistent manifestation of this being. To the ex- 
tent that men had believed in noumenal realities, they have 
presented appearance as a pure negative. It was “that which is 
not being”; it had no other being than that of illusion and 
error. But even this being was borrowed, it was itself a pre- 
tense, and philosophers met with the greatest difficulty in 
maintaining cohesion and existence in the appearance so that 
it should not itself be reabsorbed in the depth of non- 
phenomenal being. But if we once get away from what 
Nietzsche called “the illusion of worlds-behind-the-scene,” 
and if we no longer believe in the being-behind-the-appear- 
ance, then the appearance becomes full positivity; its essence 
is an “appearing” which is no longer opposed to being but on 
the contrary is the measure of it. For the being of an existent 
is exactly what it appears. Thus we arrive at the idea of the 
phenomenon such as we can find, for example, in the “phe- 
nomenology” of Husserl or of Heidegger — ^the phenomenon 
or the relative-absolute. Relative the phenomenon remains, 
for “to appear” supposes in essence somebody to whom to ap- 
pear. But it does not have the double relativity of Kant’s iS'r- 
scheinung. It does not point over its shoulder to a true being 
which would be, for it, absolute. What it is, it is absolutely, 
for it reveals itself as it is. The phenomenon can be studied 
and described as such, for it is absolutely indicative of itself. 

The duality of potency^ and act falls by the same stroke. 
The act is everything. Behind the act there is neither potency 
nor “hexis’’’^ nor virtue. We shall refuse, for example, to 
understand by “genius” — ^in the sense in which we say that 
Proust “had genius” or that he “was” a genius — a particular 
capacity^ to produce certain works, which was not exhausted 
exactly in producing them. The genius of Proust is neither 
the work considered in isolation nor the subjective ability to 

isaoxei the rough breathing 


THE PURSUIT OF BEING 


5 


produce it; it is the work considered as the totality of the 
manifestations of the person. 

That is why we can equally well reject the dualism of 
appearance and essence. The appearance does not hide the 
essence, it reveals it; it is the essence. The essence of an 
existent is no longer a property sunk in the cavity of this 
existent; it is the manifest law which presides over the suc- 
cession of its appearances, it is the principle of the series. To 
the nominalism of Poincare, defining a physical reality (an 
electric current, for example) as the sum of its various mani- 
festations, Duhem rightly opposed his own theory, which 
makes of the concept the synthetic unity of these manifesta- 
tions. To be sure phenomenology is anything but a nom- 
inalism. But essence, as the principle of the series, is definite- 
ly only the concatenation of appearances; that is, itself an 
appearance. This explains how it is possible to have an in- 
tuition of essences (the Wesenschau of Husserl, for example) . 
The phenomenal being manifests itself; it manifests its essence 
as wen as its existence, and it is nothing but the well con- 
nected series of its manifestations. 

Does this mean that by reducing the existent to its man- 
ifestations we have succeeded in overcoming all dualisms? It 
seems rather that we have converted them all into a new 
dualism: that of finite and infinite. Yet the existent in fact 
can not be reduced to a finite series of manifestations since 
each one of them is a relation to a subject constantly chang- 
ing. Although an object may disclose itself only through a 
single Abschattung, the sole fact of there being a subject 
implies the possibility of multiplying the points of view on 
that Abschattung. This sufiBces to multiply to infinity the 
Abschattung under consideration. Furthermore if the series 
of appearances were finite, that would mean that the first 
appearances do not have the possibility of reappearing, which 
is absurd, or that they can be all given at once, which is still 
more absurd. Let us understand indeed that our theory of the 
phenomenon has replaced the reality of the thing by the 
objectivity of the phenomenon and that it has based this on 
an appeal to infinity. The reality of that cup is that it is 
there and that it is not me. We shall interpret this by saying 
that the series of its appearances is bound by a principle 
which does not depend on my whim. But the appearance, 
reduced to itself and without reference to the series of which 
^t is a part, could be only an intuitive and subjective pleni- 



6 BEING. AND NOTHINGNESS 

tude, the manner in which the subject is affected. If the 
phenomenon is to reveal itself as transcendent, it is necessary 
that the subject himself transcend the appearance toward the 
total series of which it is a member. He must seize Red 
through his impression of red. By Red is meant the principle 
of the series— the electric current through the electrolysis, 
etc. But if the transcendence of the object is based on the 
necessity of causing the appearance to be always transcended, 
the result is that on principle an object posits the series of its 
appearances as infinite. Thus the appearance, which is finite, 
indicates itself in its finitude, but at the same time in order 
to be grasped as an appearance-of-that-which-appears, it re- 
quires that it be surpassed toward infinity. 

This new opposition, the “finite and the infinite,” or 
better, “the inWte in the finite,” replaces the dualism of 
being, and appearance. What appears in fact is only an aspect 
of the object, and the object is altogether in that aspect and 
altogether outside of it It is altogether within, in that it 
manifests itself in that aspect; it shows itself as the structure 
of the appearance, which is at the same time the principle of 
the series. It is altogether outside, for the series itself will 
never appear nor can it appear. Thus the outside is opposed in 
a new way to the inside, and the being-which-does-not- 
appear, to the appearance. Similarly a certain “potency” re- 
turns to inhabit the phenomenon and confer on it its very 
transcendence — a potency to be developed in a series of re^ 
or possible appearances. The genius of Proust, even when 
reduced to the works produced, is no less equivalent to the 
infinity of possible points of view which one can take on 
that work and which we will call the “inexhaustibility” of 
Proust’s work. But is not this inexhaustibility which implies 
a transcendence and a reference to the infinite — is this not 
an “hexis” at the exact moment when one apprehends it on 
the object? The essence finally is radically severed from the 
individual appearance which manifests it, since on principle 
it is that which must be able to be manifested by an infinite 
series of individual manifestations. 

In thus replacing a variety of oppositions by a single 
dualism on which they all are based, have we gained or lost? 
This we shall soon see. For the moment, the first consequence 
of the “theory of the phenomenon” is that the appearance does 
not refer to being as Kant’s phenomenon refers to the nou- 
menon. mce there is nothing behind the appearance,- and 



THE PURSUIT OF BEING 


7 


since it indicates only itself (and the total series of appear^ 
ances), it can not be supported by any being other than its 
own. The appearance can not be Ae thin film of nothingness 
which separates the being-of-the-subject from absolute-being. 
If the essence of the appearance is an “appearing” which is 
no longer opposed to any being, there arises a legitimate 
problem concerning the being of this appearing. It is this 
problem which, will be our first concern and which will be 
the point of departure for our inquiry into being and nothing- 
ness. 


H. THE PHENOMENON OF BEING AND 
THE BEING OF THE PHENOMENON 


The appearance is not supported by any existent different 
froih itself; it has its own being. The first being which we 
meet in our ontological inquiry is the being of the appear- 
ance. Is it itself an appearance? It seems so at first The 
phenomenon is what manifests itself, and being manifests 
itself to aH in some way, since we can speak of it and since 
we have a certain comprehension of it. Thus there must be 
for it a phenomenon of being, an appearance of being, capable 
of description as such. Being will be disclosed to us by some 
hind of immediate access — ^boredom, nausea, etc., and on- 
tology will be the description of the phenomenon of being as 
it, manifests itself; that is, without intermediary. However 
for any ontology we should raise a preliminary question: is 
^e phenomenon of being- thus achieved identical with the be- 
mg of phenomena? In other words, is the being which discloses 
Itself to me, which appears to me, of the same nature as the 
bemg of existents which appear to me? It seems that there is 
oo difficulty. Husserl has shown how an eidetic reduction is 
always possible; that is, how one can always pass beyond the 
concrete phenomenon toward its essence. For Heidegger also 
human realit}^” is ontic-ontologicai; that is, it can always 
pass beyond the phenomenon toward its being. But the pas- 
sage from the particular object to the essence is a passage 
from homogeneous to homogeneous. Is it the same for the 
passage from the existent to the phenomenon of being: Is 
passing beyond the existent toward the phenomenon of being 
actually to pass beyond it toward its being, as one passes be- 



8 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

yond the particular red toward its essence? Let us consider 
further. 

In a particular object one can always distinguish qualities 
like color, odor, etc. And proceeding from these, one can 
always determine an essence which they imply, as a sign im- 
plies its meaning. The totality “object-essence” makes an 
organized whole. The essence is not in the object; it is the 
meaning of the object, the principle of the series of appear- 
ances which disclose it. But being is neither one of the object’s 
qualities, capable of being apprehended among others, nor a 
meaning of the object. The object does not refer to being as to 
a signification; it would be impossible, for example, to define 
being as a presence since absence too discloses being, since 
not to be there means still to be. The object does not possess 
being, and its existence is not a participation in being, nor 
any other kind of relation. It is. That is the only way to define 
its manner of being; the object does not hide being, but 
neither does it reveal being. The object does not hide it, for 
it would be futile to try to push aside certain qualities of the 
existent in order to find the being behind them; being is being 
of them all equally. The object does not reveal being, for it 
would be futile to address oneself to the object in order 
to apprehend its being. The existent is a phenomenon; this 
means that it designates itself as an organized totality of quali- 
ties. It designates itself and not its being. Being is simply the 
condition of all revelation. It is being-for-revealing (etre-poiir- 
devoiler) and not revealed being (etre devoile). What then is 
the meaning of the surpassing toward the ontological, of which 
Heidegger speaks? Certainly I can pass beyond this table or 
this chair toward its being and raise the question of the being- 
of-the-table or the being-of-the-chair.= But at that moment I 
turn my eyes away from the phenomenon of the table in order 
to concentrate on the phenomenon of being, which is no 
longer the condition of all revelation, but which is itself 
something revealed — an appearance which, as such, needs in 
turn a being on the basis of which it can reveal itself. 

If the being of phenomena is not resolved in a phe- 
nomenon of being and if nevertheless we can not say any- 
thing about being without considering this phenomenon of 
being, then the exact relation which unites the phenomenon 

'Tr. Perhaps a more intelligible paraphrase would be, “the question of 
what It means to be a table or a chair.” 



THE PURSUIT OF BEING 


9 


of being to the being of the phenomenon must be established 
trst of all. We can do this more easily if we will consider 
that the whole of the preceding remarks has been directly 
inspired by the revealing intuition of the phenomenon of 
being. By not considering being as the condition of revelation 
but rather being as an appearance which can be determined 
in concepts, we have understood first of all fiiat knowledge 
can not by itself give an account of being; that is, the being 
of the phenomenon can not be reduced to the phenomenon of 
being. In a word, the phenomenon of being is “ontological” 
in the sense that we speak of the ontological proof of St. 
Anselm and Descartes. It is an appeal to being; it requires, 
as phenomenon, a foundation which is transphenomenal. The 
phenomenon of being requires the transphenomenality of 
being. That does not mean that being is found hidden behind 
phenomena (we have seen that the phenomenon can not hide 
being), nor that the phenomenon is an appearance which 
refers to a distinct being (the phenomenon exists only qua 
appearance; that is, it indicates itself on the foundation of 
being). What is implied by the preceding considerations is 
that the being of the phenomenon, although coextensive with 
the phenomenon, can not be subject to the phenomenal con- 
dition — ^which is to exist only in so far as it reveals itself — ^and 
that consequently' it surpasses the knowledge which we have 
of It and provides the basis for such knowledge. 


ni. THE PRE-REFLECTIVE COGITO AND 
the being of the PERCIPERE 

0:^ will perhaps be tempted to reply that the difficulties 
tn ° ail pertain to a certain conception of being, 

^ realism entirely incompatible with 

of tti motion of appearance. What determines the being 
bavp t is the fact that it appears. And since we 

icted reality to the phenomenon, we can say of the 

to ifc appears. Why not push the idea 

apoearina? >??? appearance is its 

cloihA fif' j , ^ simply a way of choosing new words to 
ta “f Berkeley. And it is in 

after at Husserl and his followers are doing when, 

heat the sheeted the phenomenological reduction, they 
noema as unreal and declare that its esse is percipi. 



10 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

It seems that the famous formula of Berkeley can not satis- 
fy — for two essential reasons, one concerning the nature of 
the percipi, the other that of the percipere. 


The nature of the percipere. 

If every metaphysics in fact presupposes a theory of 
knowledge, every theory of knowledge in turn presupposes a 
metaphysics. This means among other things that an idealism 
intent on reducing being to the knowledge which we have 
of it, ought first to give some kind of guarantee for the 
being of knowledge. If one begins, on the other hand, by 
taking the knowledge as a given, without being concerned to 
establish a basis for its being, and if one then affirms that 
esse est percipi, the totality “perceived-perception” lacks the 
support of a solid being and so falls away in nothingness. 
Thus the being of knowledge can not be measured by knowl- 
edge; it not subject to the percipi,^ Therefore the founda- 
tion-of-being (Vetre-fondement} for the percipere and the 
percipi can not itself be subject to the percipi; it must be 
transphenomenal. Let us return now to our point of departure. 
We can always agree that the percipi refers to a being not 
subject to the laws of the appearance, but we still maintain 
that this transphenomenal being is the being of the subject 
Thus the percipi would refer to the percipiens — the known 
to knowledge and knowledge to the being who knows (in 
his capacity as being, not as being known); that is, knowledge 
refers to consciousness. This is what Husserl understood; for 
if the noema is for him an unreal correlate of noesis, and if 
its ontological law is the percipi, the noesis, on the contrary, 
appears to him as reality, of which the principal characteris- 
tic is to give itself to the reflection which knows it as “having 
^eady been there before.” For the law of being in the know- 
ing subject is to-be-conscious. Consciousness is not a mode of 
particular knowledge which may be called an inner meaning 
or self-knowledge; it is the dimension of transphenomenal be- 
ing in the subject. 

Let us look more closely at this dimension of being. We 
said that consciousness is the knowing being in his capacity 
as being and not as being known. This means that we must 


2 It goes without saying that any attempt to replace the percipere by 

fruitless. If we 

® f ^ "acting." it would still be neces- 

sary to guarantee the being of acting apart from the action. 



11 


THE PURSUIT OF BEING 

abandon the primacy of knowledge if we wish to establish that 
knowledge. Of course consciousness can know and know 
itself. But it is in itself something other than a knowledge 
turned back upon itself. 

AH consciousness, as Husserl has shown, is conscious- 
ness of something. This means that there is no consciousness 
' which is not a positing of a transcendent object, or if you 
prefer, that consciousness has no “content” We must re- 
nounce those neutral “givens” which, according to the system 
of reference chosen, find their place either “in the world” or 
“in the psyche.” A table is not in consciousness — ^not even 
in the capacity of a representation. A table is in space, beside 
the window, etc. The existence of the table in fact is a center 
of opacity for consciousness; it would require an infinite pro- 
cess to inventory the total contents of a thing. To introduce 
this opacity into consciousness would be to refer to infini ty 
the inventory which it can make of itself, to make conscious- 
ness a thing, and to deny the cogito. The first procedure of a 
philosophy ought to be to expel things from consciousness 
and to reestablish its true connection with the world, to know 
that consciousness is a positional consciousness of the world. 
AH consciousness is positional in that it transcends itself in 
order to reach an object, and it exhausts' itself in this same 
positing. All that there is of intention in my actual conscious- 
ness is directed toward the outside, toward the table; all' 
iny judgments or practical activities, all my present inclina- 
tions transcend themselves; they aim at the table and are 
absorbed in it. Not all consciousness is knowledge (there are 
^ates of ^ective consciousness, for example), but all know- 
iDgconsciousness can be knowledge only of its object. 
.However, the necessary and sufficient condition for a 
owmg consciousness to be knowledge of its object, is that 
I e consciousness of itself as being that knowledge. This 
a necessary condition, for if my consciousness were not 
onsciousness of being consciousness of the table, it would 
^ en be consciousness of that table without' consciousness of 
rsm^ T- ^ words, it would be a consciousness igno- 
suff! • ^ unconscious — which is absurd. This is a 

of condition, for my being conscious of being conscious 
j table suffices in fart for me to be conscious of it. That 
taKif. °pt sufficient to permit me to affirm that this 

in itself — but rather that it exists for me. 
a is this consciousness of consciousness? We suffer 



12 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

to such an extent from the illusion of the primacy of knowl- 
edge that we are immediately ready to make of the conscious- 
ness of consciousness an idea ideae in the manner of Spinoza; 
that is, a knowledge of knowledge. Alain, wanting to express 
the obvious “To know is to be conscious of knowing,” inter- 
prets it in these terms: “To know is to know that one knows.” 
In this way we should have defined reflection or positional 
consciousness of consciousness, or better yet knowledge of 
consciousness. This would be a complete consciousness 
directed toward something which is not it; that is, toward 
consciousness as object of reflection. It would then transcend 
itself and like the positional consciousness of the world would 
be exhausted in aiming at its object. But that object would be 
itself a consciousness. 

It does not seem possible for us to accept this interpreta- 
tion of the consciousness of consciousness. The reduction of 
consciousness to knowledge in fact involves our introducing 
into consciousness the subject-object dualism which is typical 
of knowledge. But if we accept the law of the knower-known 
dyad, then a third term will be necessary in order for the 
knower to become known in turn, and we will be faced with 
this dilemma: Either we stop at any one term of the series — 
the known, the knower known, the knower known by the 
knower, etc. In this case the totality of the phenomenon falls 
into the unknown; that is, we always bump up against a non- 
self-conscious reflection and a final term. Or else we affirm 
the necessity of an infinite regress (idea ideae ideae, etc.), 
which is absurd. Thus to the necessity of ontologically es- 
tablishing consciousness we would add a new necessity: that 
of establishing it epistemologically. Are we obliged after all 
to introduce the law of this dyad into consciousness? 
Consciousness of self is not dual. If we wish to avoid an in- 
finite regress, there must be an immediate, non-cognitive rela- 
tion of the self to itself. 

Furthermore the reflecting consciousness posits the con- 
sciousness reflected-on, as its object. In the act of reflecting 
I pass judgment on the consciousness reflected-on; I am 
^amed of it, I am proud of it, I will it, I deny it, etc. 
The immediate consciousness which I have of perceiving 
does not permit me either to judge or to will or to be ashamed. 
It does not know my perception, does not posit it; all that 
there is of intention in my actual consciousness is directed 
toward the outside, toward the world. In turn, this spontane- 



THE PURSUIT OF BEING 


13 


ous consciousness of my perception is constitutive of my per- 
ceptive consciousness. In other words, every positional con- 
sciousness of an objeci is at the same time a non-positional 
consciousness of itself. If I count the cigarettes which are in 
that case, I have the impression of disclosing an objective 
property of this collection of cigarettes: they are a dozen. This 
property appears to my consciousness as a property existing in 
the world. It is very possible that I have no positional con- 
sciousness of counting them. Then I do not know myself as 
counting. Proof of this is that children who are capable 
of making an addition spontaneously can not explain sub- 
sequently how they set about it. Piaget’s tests, which show 
this, constitute an excellent refutation of the formula of Alain 
— To know is to know that one knows. Yet at the moment 
when these cigarettes are revealed to me as a dozen, I have 
a non-thetic consciousness of my adding activity. If anyone 
questioned me, indeed, if anyone should ask, “Vi^at are you 
doing there?” I should reply at once, “I am counting.” This 
reply aims not only at the instantaneous consciousness which I 
can achieve by reflection but at those fleeting consciousnesses 
which have passed without being reflected-on, those which 
are forever not-reflected-on in my immediate past Thus re- 
flection has no kind of primacy over the consciousness re- 
fiected-on. It is not reflection wMch reveals the consciousness 
reflected-on to itself. Quite the contrary, it is the non-reflective 
consciousness which renders the reflection possible; there is a 
pre-reflective cogito which is the condition of the Cartesian 
cogito. At the same time it is the non-thetic consciousness of 
counting which is the very condition of my act of adding. If it 
were othenvise, how would the addition be the unifying theme 
of my consciousness? In order that this theme should preside 
over a whole series of syntheses of unifications and recogni- 
tions, it must be present to itself, not as a thing but as an oper- 
ative intention which can exist only as the revealing-revealed 
(revelante-revSlee), to use an expression of Heidegger’s. Thus 
in order to count, it is necessary to be conscious of counting. 

Of course, someone may say, but this makes a circle. For 
IS it not necessary that I count in fact in order to be conscious 
of counting? That is true. However there is no circle, or if 
you like, it is the very nature of consciousness to exist “in a 
circle.” The idea can be expressed in these terms: Every con- 
scious existence exists as consciousness of existing. We 
Understand now why the first consciousness of consciousness 



BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


is not positional; it is because it is one with the consciousness 
of which it is consciousness. At one stroke it determines 
itself as consciousness of perception and as perception. The 
necessity of syntax has compelled us hitherto to speak of the 
“non-positional consciousness of self.” But we can no longer 
use this expression in which the “of self” still evokes 
the idea of knowledge. (Henceforth we shall put the “of” 
inside parentheses to show that it merely satisfies a grammati- 
cal requirement.)^ 

This self-consciousness we ought to consider not as a new 
consciousness, but as the only mode of existence which is 
possible for a consciousness of something. Just as an extended 
object is compelled to exist according to three dimensions, so 
an intention, a pleasure, a grief can exist only as immediate 
self-consciousness. If the intention is not a thing in conscious- 
ness, then the being of the intention can be only consciousness. 
It is not necessary to understand by this that on the one- hand, 
some external cause (an organic trouble, an unconscious im- 
pulse, another Erlebnis) could determine that a psychic event_ 
— a pleasure, for example — ^produce itself, that on the 
other hand, this event so determined in its material structure 
should be compelled to produce itself as self-consciousness. 
This would be to make the non-thetic consciousness a quality 
of the positional consciousness (in the sense that the percep- 
tion, positional consciousness of that table, would have as 
addition the quality of self-consciousness) and would thus 
fall back into Ae illusion of the theoretical primacy of knowl- 
edge. This would be moreover to make the psychic event a 
thing and to qualify it with “conscious” just as I can qualify 
this blotter with “red.” Pleasure can not be distinguished — 
even logically — ^from consciousness of pleasure. Consciousness 
(of) pleasure is constitutive of the pleasure as the very mode 
of its own existence, as the material of which it is made, and 
not as a form which is imposed by a blow upon a hedonistic 
material. Pleasure can not exist “before” consciousness of 
pleasure — not even in the form of potentiality or potency. A 
potential pleasure can exist only as consciousness (of) being 
potential. Potencies of consciousness exist only as conscious- 
ness of potencies. 

Conversely, as I showed earlier, we must avoid defining 
pleasure by the consciousness which I have of it. This would 


<Tr. Since EngUsh syntax does not 
freely translate conscience (de) soi as 


require the “of,” I shaU henceforth 
“self-consciousness.” 



THE PURSUIT OF BEING 


15 


be to fall into an idealism of consciousness which would 
bring us by indirect means to the primacy of knowledge. 
Pleasure must not disappear behind its own self-conscious- 
ness; it is not a representation, it is a concrete event, full 
and- absolute. It is no more a quality of self-consciousness 
than self-consciousness is a quality of pleasure. There is no 
more first a consciousness which receives subsequently 
the ^ect “pleasure” like water which one stains, than there 
is first a pleasure (unconscious or psychological) which re- 
ceives subsequently the quality of “conscious” like a pencil 
of light rays. There is an indivisible, indissoluble being — 
definitely not a substance supporting its qualities like particles 
of being, but a being which is existence through and through. 
Pleasure is the being of self-consciousness and this self-con- 
sciousness is the law of being of pleasure. This is what 
Heidegger expressed very well when he wrote (though speak- 
ing of Dasein, not of consciousness) : “The ‘how’ {essentia) 
of this being, so far as it is possible to speak of it generally, 
must be conceived in terms of its existence {existentia)''* 
This means that consciousness is not produced as a particular 
instance of an abstract possibility but that in rising to the 
center of being, it creates and supports its essence — ihat is, 
the synthetic order of its possibilities. 

This means also that the type of being of consciousness is 
the opposite of that which the ontological proof reveals to us. 
Since consciousness is not possible before being, but since its 
being is the source and condition of all possibility, its exis- 
tence implies its essence. Husserl expresses this aptly in speak- 
ing of the “necessity of fact” In order for there to be an 
essence of pleasure, there must be first the fact of a conscious- 
ness (of) this pleasure. It is futile to try to invoke pretended 
of consciousness of which the articulated whole would 
constitute the essence. A law is a transcendent object of 
owledge; there can be consciousness of a law, not a law 
consciousness. For the same reasons it is impossible to 
sign to a consciousness a motivation other than itself. Other- 
thp '^ould be^ necessary to conceive that consciousness to 
It w it is an effect, is not conscious (of) itself, 

out necessary in some manner that it should be with- 

being. We should fall into that too 
or a which makes consciousness semi-conscious 

thrnt, u consciousness is consciousness through and 

through. It can be limited only by itself. 



16 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

This self-determination of consciousness must not be con- 
ceived as a genesis, as a becoming, for that would force us to 
suppose that consciousness is prior to its own existence. 
Neither is it necessary to conceive of this self-creation as an 
act, for in that case consciousness would be conscious (of) 
itself as an act, which it is not. Consciousness is a plenum of 
existence, and this determination of itself by itself is an 
essential characteristic. It would even be wise not to misuse 
the expression “cause of self,” which allows us to suppose a 
progression, a relation of self-cause to self-elfect. It would be 
more exact to say very simply: The existence of consciousness 
comes from consciousness itself. By that we need not under- 
stand that consciousness “derives from nothingness.” There 
can not be “nothingness of consciousness” before conscious- 
ness. “Before” consciousness one can conceive only of a 
plenum of being of which no element can refer to an absent 
consciousness. If there is to be nothingness of consciousness, 
there must be a consciousness which has been and which is 
no more and a witnessing consciousness which poses the 
nothingness of the first consciousness for a synthesis of rec- 
ognition. Consciousness is prior to nothingness and “is de- 
rived” from being.® 

One will perhaps have some difficulty in accepting these 
conclusions. But considered more carefully, they will appear 
perfectly clear. The paradox is not that there are “self-acti- 
vated” existences but that there is no otlier kind. What is 
truly unthinkable is passive existence; that is, existence which 
perpetuates itself without having the force either to produce 
itself or to preserve itself. From this point of view there is 
nothing more incomprehensible than the principle of inertia. 
Indeed where would consciousness “come” from if it did 
“come” from something? From the limbo of the unconscious 
or of the physiological. But if we ask ourselves how this limbo 
in its turn can exist and where it derives its existence, we find 
ourselves faced with the concept of passive existence; that is, 
we can no more absolutely understand how this non-conscious 
given (unconscious or physiological) which does not derive its 
existence from itself, can nevertheless perpetuate this existence 


spiat CMtainly does not mean that consciousness is the foundation of 

of thTt- as we shall see later, there is a full contingency 

of the being of consciousness. We wish only to show (I) That nothins is 
the cause of consciousness. (2) That consciousness is the cause of its own 



THE PURSUIT OF BEING 


17 


and find in addition the ability to produce a consciousness. 
This demonstrates the great favor which the proof a con- 
tingentia mundi has enjoyed. 

Thus by abandoning the primacy of knowledge, we 
have discovered the being of the knower and encountered the 
absolute, that same absolute which the rationalists of the 
seventeenth century had defined and logically constituted as 
an object of knowledge. But precisely because the question 
concerns an absolute of existence and not of knowledge, it is 
not subject to that famous objection according to which a 
known absolute is no longer an absolute because it becomes 
relative to the knowledge which one has of it. In fact the 
absolute here is not the result of a logical construction on 
the ground of knowledge but the subject of the most concrete 
of experiences. And it is not at all relative to this experience 
because it is this experience. Likewise it is a non-substantial 
absolute. The ontological error of Cartesian rationalism is not 
to have seen that if the absolute is defined by the primacy of 
existence over essence, it can not be conceived as a substance. 
Consciousness has nothing substantial, it is pure “appearance” 
in the sense that it exists only to the degree to which it ap- 
pears. But it is precisely because consciousness is pure appear- 
ance, because it is total emptiness (since the entire world is 
outside it) — ^it is because of this identity of appearance and 
existence within it that it can be considered as the absolute. 

IV. THE BEING OF THE PERCIPI 

It seems that we have arrived at the goal of our inquiry. We 
have reduced things to the united totality of their appear- 
ances, and we have established that these appearances lay 
claim to a being which is no longer itself appearance. The 
*‘percipV’ referred us to a percipiens, the being of which has 
been revealed to us as consciousness. Thus we have attained 
the ontological foundation of knowledge, the first being to 
whom all other appearances appear, the absolute in relation 
to which every phenomenon is relative. This is no longer the 
subject in Kant’s meaning of the term, but it is subjectivity 
itself, the immanence of self in self. Henceforth we have 
escaped idealism. For the latter, being is measured by knowl- 
edge, which subjects it to the law of duality. There is only 



BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


known being; it is a question of thought itself. Thought 
appears only through its own products; that is, we always 
apprehend it only as the signification of thoughts produced, 
and the philosopher in quest of thought must question the 
established sciences in order to derive it from them as the con- 
dition of their possibility. We, on the other hand, have appre- 
hended a being which is not subject to knowledge and which 
founds knowledge, a thought which is definitely not given as a 
representation or a signification of expressed thoughts, but 
which is directly apprehended such as it is — and this mode of 
apprehension is not a phenomenon of knowledge but is the 
structure of being. We find ourselves at present on the ground 
of the phenomenology of Husserl although Husserl himself 
has not always been faithful to his first intuition. Are we 
satisfied? We have encountered a transphenomenal being, 
but is it actually the being to which the phenomenon of being 
refers? Is it indeed the being of the phenomenon? In 
other words is consciousness sufficient to provide the 
foundation for the appearance qua appearance? We have 
extracted its being from the phenomenon in order to give it 
to consciousness, and we anticipated that consciousness would 
subsequently restore it to the phenomenon. Is this possible? 
We shall find our answer in the examination of the ontologi- 
cal exigencies of the percipi. 

Let us note first that there is a being of the thing per- 
ceived — as perceived. Even if I wished to reduce this table 
to a synthesis of subjective impressions, I must at least remark 
that it reveals itself qua table through this synthesis, that it is 
the transcendent limit of the synthesis, the reason for it and 
its end. The table is before knowledge and can not be identi- 
fied with the knowledge which we have of it; otherwise it 


would be consciousness — i.e., pure immanence — and it would 
disappear as table. For the same cause even if a pure distinc- 
tion of re^on is to separate the table from the synthesis of 
subjective impressions through which I apprehend it, at least 
It c^ not be this synthesis; that would be to reduce it to a 
synthetic activity of connection. In so far then as the known 
can not^ e r^bsorbed into knowledge, we must discover for 

we are told, is the percipi. Let us 
reduced ^1 being of the percipi can not be 

any more tbn percipiens — i.e., to consciousness — 

y more than the table is reduced to the bond of representa- 



THE PURSUIT OF BEING 


19 


tions. At most we can say that it is relative to this being. But 
this relativity does not render unnecessary an examination of 
the being of the percipi. 

Now the mode of the percipi is the passive. If then the 
being of the phenomenon resides in its percipi, this being 
is passivity. Relativity and passivity — ^such are the character- 
istic structures of the esse in so far as this is reduced to the 
percipi. What is passivity? I am passive when I undergo a 
modification of which I am not the origin; that is, neither the 
source nor the creator. Thus my being supports a mode of 
being of which it is not the source. Yet in order for me to 
support, it is still necessary that I exist, and due to this fact 
my existence is always situated on the other side of passivity. 
‘To support passively,” for example, is a conduct which I 
assume and which engages my liberty as much as to “reject 
resolutely.” If I am to be for always “the-one-who-has-been- 
offended,” I rriust persevere in my being; that is, I myself 
assume my existence. But all the same I respond on my own 
account in some way and I assume my offense; I cease to be 
passive in relation to it Hence we have this choice of alter- 
natives: either, indeed, I am not passive in my being, in which 
case I become the foundation of my affections even if at first 
I have not been the origin of them — or I am affected with 
passivity in my very existence, my being is a received being, 
and hence all falls into nothingness. Thus passivity is a 
doubly relative phenomenon, relative to the activity of the 
one who acts and to the existence of the one who suffers. This 
implies that passivity can not affect the actual being of the 
passive existent; it is a relation of one being to another being 
and not of one being to a nothingness. It is impossible 
that the percipere affects the perceptum of being, for in order 
for the perceptum to be affected it would of necessity have to 
be^ already given in some way and exist before having re- 
ceived being. One can conceive of a creation on condition 
that the created being recover itself, tear itself away from the 
creator in order to close in on itself immediately and assume 
its being; it is in this sense that a book exists as distinct from 
its author. But if the act of creation is to be continued 
indefinitely, if the created being is to be supported even in 
its inmost parts, if it does not have its own independence, if 
It is in itself only nothingness — ^then the creature is in no 
Way distmguished from its creator; it is absorbed in him; we 



20 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


are dealing with a false transcendence, and the creator can 
not have even an illusion of getting out of his subjectivity.® 
Furthermore the passivity of the recipient demands an 
equal passivity on the part of the agent. This is expressed in 
the principle of action and reaction; it is because my hand 
can be crushed, grasped, cut, that my hand can crush, cut, 
grasp. What element of passivity can we assign to perception, 
to knowledge? They are all activity, all spontaneity. It is 
precisely because it is pure spontaneity, because nothing can 
get a grip on it that consciousness can not act upon anything. 
Thus the esse est percipi would require that consciousness, 
pure spontaneity which can not act upon anything, give being 
to a transcendent nothingness, at the same time keeping it 
in its state of nothingness. So much nonsense! Husserl has 
attempted to overcome these objections by introducing passivi- 
ty into the noesis; this is the hyle or pure flux of experience 
and the matter of the passive syntheses. But he has only added 
an additional difficulty to those which we have mentioned. 
He has introduced in fact those neutral givens, the impossi- 
bility of which we have shown earlier. To be sure, these are 
not “contents” of consciousness, but they remain only 
so much the more unintelligible. The hyle in fact could 
not be consciousness, for it would disappear in translucency 
and could not offer that resisting basis of impressions which 
must be surpassed toward the object. But if it does not 
belong to consciousness, where does it derive its being and its 
opacity? How can it preserve at once the opaque resistance 
of things and the subjectivity of thought? Its esse can not 
come to it from a percipi since it is not even perceived, for 
consciousness transcends it toward the objects. But if the 
hyle^ derives its being from itself alone, we meet once again 
the insoluble problem of the connection of consciousness with 
existents independent of it. Even if we grant to Husserl that 
there is hyletic stratum for the noesis, we can not conceive 
how consciousness can transcend this subjective toward 
objectivity. In giving to the hyle both the characteristics of 
a thing and the characteristics of consciousness, Husserl be- 
heved that he facilitated the passage from the one to the 
succeeded only in creating a hybrid being 
w 1C consciousness rejects and which can not be a part of 


Cartesian docti 

logical culmmation in the work of Spinoza. 


of substance finds its 



THE PURSUIT OF BEING 


21 


Furthermore, as we have seen, the percipi implies that the 
law of being of the perceptum is relativity. Can we conceive 
that the being of the thing known is relative to the knowl- 
edge? What can the relativity of being mean for an existent 
if not that the existent has its own being in something other 
than in itself; that is, in an existent which it is not. Certainly 
it would not be inconceivable that a being should be external 
to itself if' one means that this being is its own externality. 
But such is not the case here. The perceived being is before 
consciousness; consciousness can not reach it, and it can not 
enter into consciousness; and as the perceived being is cut 
ofi from consciousness, it exists cut off from its own existence. 
It would be no use to make of it an unreal in the manner of 
Husserl; even as unreal it must e^dst. 

Thus the two determinations of relativity and of passivity, 
which can concern modes of being, can on no account apply 
to being. The esse of the phenomenon can not be its percipi. 
The transphenomenal being of consciousness can not provide 
a basis for the transphenomenal being of the phenomenon. 
Here we see the error of the phenomenalists: having justifiably 
reduced the object to the connected series of its appearances, 
they believed they had reduced its being to the succession of 
its modes of being. That is why they have explained it by 
concepts which can be applied only to the modes of being, 
for they are pointing out the relations between a plurality of 
already existing beings. 


V. THE ONTOLOGICAL PROOF 

Being has not been given its due. We believed we had dis- 
pensed with granting transphenomenality to the being of the 
phenomenon because we had discovered the transphenome- 
nality of the being of consciousness. We are going to see, on 
the contrary, that this very transphenomenality requires that 
of the being of the phenomenon. There is an “ontological 
proof” to be derived not from the reflective cogito but from 
the pre-reflective being of the percipiens. This we shall 
now trj' to demonstrate. 

All ^ consciousness is consciousness of something. This 
definition of consciousness can be taken in two very distinct 
Senses: either w'e understand by this that consciousness is 
constitutive of the being of its object, or it means that con- 



22 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

sciousness in its inmost nature is a relation to a tran- 
scendent being. But the first interpretation of the formula 
destroys itself: to be conscious of something is to be con- 
fronted with a concrete and full presence which is not 
consciousness. Of course one can be conscious of an absence. 
But this absence appears necessarily as a pre-condition of 
presence. As we have seen, consciousness is a real subjectivity 
and the impression is a subjective plenitude. But this sub- 
jectivity can not go out of itself to posit a transcendent object 
in such a way as to endow it with a plenitude of impressions.'^ 
If then we wish at any price to make the being of the phe- 
nomenon depend on consciousness, the object must be dis- 
tinguished from consciousness not by its presence but by its 
absence, not by its plenitude, but by its nothingness. If being 
belongs to consciousness, the object is not consciousness, not 
to the extent that it is another being, but that it is non-being. 
This is the appeal to the infinite of which we spoke in the 
first section of this work. For Husserl, for example, the anima- 
tion of the hyletic nucleus by the only intentions which can 
find their fulfillment (Erfullung) in this hyle is not enough to 
bring us outside of subjectivity. The truly objectifying inten- 
tions are empty intentions, those which aim beyond the 
present subjective appearance at the infinite totality of the 
series of appearances. 

We must further understand that the intentions aim at 
appearances which are never to be given at one time. It is an 
impossibility on principle for the terms of an infinite series 
to exist all at the same time before consciousness, along with 
the real absence of all these terms except for the one which is 
the foundation of objectivity. If present these impressions — 
even in infinite number — 'Would dissolve in the subjective; it 
is their absence which gives them objective being. Thus the 
being of the object is pure non-being. It is defined as a 
lack. It is that which escapes, that which by definition wall 
never be given, that which offers itself only in fleeting and 
successive profiles. 

But how can non-being be the foundation of being? How 
can the absent, expected subjective become thereby the 
objective? A great joy which I hope for, a grief which I 
dread, acquire from that fact a certain transcendence. This I 
admit. But that transcendence in immanence does not bring 

c ^ ^ impressions are objectified into qualities 

nf tnf» fMiTiOf ^ 



THE PURSUIT OF BEING 


23 


us out of the subjective. It is true that things give themselves in 
profile; that is, simply by appearances. And it is true that 
each appearance refers to other appearances. But each of them 
is already in itself alone a transcendent being, not a subjective 
material of impressions — a plenitude of being, not a lack — a 
presence, not an absence. It is futile by a sleight of hand to 
attempt to found the reality of the object on the subjective 
plenitude of impressions and its objectivity on non-being; the 
objective will never come out of the subjective nor the 
transcendent from immanence, nor being from non-being. 
But, we are told, Husserl defines consciousness precisely as a 
transcendence. In truth he does. This is what he posits. This 
is his essential discovery. But from the moment that he makes 
of the noema an unreal, a correlate of the noesis, a noema 
whose esse is percipi, he is totally unfaithful to his principle. 

Consciousness is consciousness of something. This means 
that transcendence is the constitutive structure of conscious- 
ness; that is, that consciousness is bom supported by a being 
which is not itself. This is what we call the ontological proof. 
No doubt someone will reply that the existence of the demand 
of consciousness does not prove that this demand ought to 
be satisfied. But this objection can not hold up against an 
analysis of what Husserl calls intentionality, though, to be 
sure, he misunderstood its essential character. To say that 
consciousness is consciousness of something means that for 
consciousness there is no being outside of that precise 
obligation to be a revealing intuition of something — i.e., of a 
fianscendent being. Not only does pure subjectivity, if 
initially given, fail to transcend itself to posit the objective; a 
“pure” subjectivity disappears. What can properly be called 
subjectivity is consciousness (of) consciousness. But this 
consciousness (of being) consciousness must be qualified in 
sorne way, and it can be qualified only as revealing intuition 
or it is nothing. Now a revealing intuition implies something 
revealed. Absolute subjectivity can be established only in the 
face of something revealed; imman ence can be defined only 
Within the apprehension of a transcendent. It might appear 
that there is an echo here of Kant’s refutation of problemati- 
cal idealism. But we ought rather to think of Descartes. 
We are here on the ground of being, not of knowledge. It is 
not a question of showing that the phenomena of inner sense 
nnply^ the existence of objective spatial phenomena, but that 
consciousness implies in its being a non-conscious and 



24 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

transph-cnomenal being. In particular there is no point in 
replying that in fact subjectivity implies objectivity and that 
it constitutes itself in constituting the objective; we have 
seen that subjectivity is powerless to constitute the objective. 
To say that consciousness is consciousness of something is to 
say that it must produce itself as a revealed-revelation of a 
being which is not it and which gives itself as already existing 
when consciousness reveals it. 

Thus we have left pure appearance and have arrived at 
full being. Consciousness is a being whose existence posits 
its essence, and inversely it is consciousness of a being, whose 
essence implies its existence; that is, in which appear- 
ance lays claim to being. Being is everywhere. Certainly we 
could apply to consciousness the definition which Heidegger 
reserves for Dasein and say that it is a being such that in 
its being, its being is in question. But it would be necessary 
to complete the definition and formulate it more like this; 
consciousness is a being such that in Us being, its being is in 
question in so far as this being implies a being other than 
itself. 

We must understand that this being is no other than the 
transphenomenal being of phenomena and not a noumenal 
being which is hidden behind them. It is the being of this 
table, of this package of tobacco, of the lamp, more generally 
the being of the world which is implied by consciousness. It 
requires simply that the being of that which appears does not 
exist only in so far as it appears. The transphenomenal being 
of what exists for consciousness is itself in itself {lui-meme en 
soi). 


VI. BEING-IN-ITSELF 

We can now form a few definite conclusions about the 
phenomenon of being, which we have considered in order 
to make the preceding observations. Consciousness is the re- 
vealed-revelation of existents, and existents appear before 
consciousness on the foundation of their being. Neverthe- 
less the primary characteristic of the being of an existent is 
never to reveal itself completely to consciousness. An existent 
can not be stripped of its being; being is the ever present 
^ndation of the existent; it is everywhere in it and nowhere. 
ITiere is no being which is not the being of a certain mode of 


25 


the pursuit of being 

being, none ^hich^oan not be f “ametimt 

of being which p™ beyond the eidstent, not toward 

Consciousness can always pas ^ y . 

being, but toward the 

:i L"*— rrr to^-cen^inrof t: ‘Sttt 

U r«e\,s”fo conscio..ngs is the ph— n 

of being. This meaning has itself a bemg. based on wm 

“^t^lofthis point of view we can underhand to 

famous Scholastic argument , concerns being, 

vicious circle in every P™P?““°? J^^tmSes SLg bS 
since any judgment about bemg Y necessary 

in actuality there is no vicious circle, fo its 

again to pass beyond the bemg h^inp of every 

meaning; the meaning of being is valid for , of 

phenomenon, including its own bemg. indicates 

being is not being, as we have akeady noted. But mdica 
being and requires it-although, m truth, the ontoio^ 
proof which we -mentioned above is ^ li^ for the 

Uuely for it; tore is p^yfsuSdent 

Whole domain of consciousness. But tms prooi 

to justify, all the information which we ca every 

phenomenon of being. The phenomenon c ’ j,onscious- 

primary phenomenon, is immediately ,, g_ 

ness. We have at each instant what H^degscr caUs ^p^^^ 
ontological comprehension of it; that is, o P 

accompanied by a fixing in concepts and "^^^^ahon For^s 
at present, then, there is no question of of 

pheLmenon for the sake of trying to fix the mean g 

being. We must observe always: _ valid 

(1) That this elucidation of the meaning of 

only for the being of the phenomenon. Since ^ecessi- 
consciousness is radically different, its meaning , , 
tate a particular elucidation, in terrns of the 
tion of another type of being, being-foMtse ^ 
soi), w'hich we shall define later and which is opp 

being-in-itself (/’e/re-cn-5of) ofthephenomenon. 

(2) That the elucidation of the meaning o g 

itself which we are going to attempt here can be only P 

visional. The aspects which will be de- 
significations which ultimately we must appre en ^ 



26 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS - 



termine. In particular the preceding reflections have per- 
mitted us to distinguish two absolutely separated regions of 
being: the being of the pre-refiective cogito and the being of 
the phenomenon. But although the concept of being has this 
peculiarity of being divided into two regions without com- 
munication, we must nevertheless explain how these two 
regions can be placed under the same heading. That 
will necessitate the investigation of these two types of 
being, and it is evident that we can not truly grasp the mean- 
ing of either one until we can establish their true connection 
with the notion of being in general and the relations which 
unite them. We have indeed established by the examination 
of non-positional self-consciousness that the being of the 
phenomenon can on no account act upon consciousness. In 
this way we have ruled out a realistic conception of the rela- 
tions of the phenomenon with consciousness. 

We have shown also by the examination of the ,sponta- 
neity of the non-reflective cogito that consciousness can not get 
out of its subjectivity if the latter has been initially given, and 
that consciousness can not act upon transcendent being nor 
without contradiction admit of the passive elements necessary 
in order to constitute a transcendent being arising from them. 
Thus we have ruled out the idealist solution of the problem. 
It appears that we have barred all doors and that we are now 


condemned to regard transcendent being and consciousness 
as two closed totalities without possible communication. It 
will be necessary to show that the problem allows a solution 
other than realism or idealism. 


certain number of characteristics can be fixed on im- 
mediately because for the most part they follow naturally 
from what we have just said. 

A clear view of the phenomenon of being has often been 
obscured by a very common prejudice which we shall call 
creationism.” Since r ,ople supposed that God had given 
bemg to the world, jeing always appeared tainted with a 
certain passivity. But a creation ex nihilo can not explain 
the co^g to pass of being; for if being conceived in a 
subjectmty, even a divine subjectivity, it remains a mode of 
intra-subjective being. Such subjectivity can not have even the 
representation of an objectivity, and consequently it can not 
.affected with the will to create the objective. Further- 

the fiilm ®tidd^y placed outside the subjective by 
the fulguration of which Leibniz speaks, can only affirm 



THE PURSUIT OF BEING 


27 


itself as distinct from and opposed to its creator; otherwise it 
dissolves in him. The theory of perpetual creation, by remov- 
ing from being what the Germans call Selbstandigkeit, 
makes it disappear in the divine subjectivity. If being exists as 
over against God, it is its own support; it does not preserve 
the least trace of divine creation. In a word, even if it had 
been created, being-in-itself would be inexplicable in terms of 
creation; for it assumes its being beyond the creation. 

This is equivalent to saying that being is uncreated. But we 
need not conclude that being creates itself, which would 
suppose that it is prior to itself. Being can not be causa sui in 
the manner of consciousness. Being is itself. This means that 
-it is neither passivity nor activity. Both of these notions are 
human and designate human conduct or the instruments of 
human conduct. There is activity when a conscious being uses 
means with an end in view. And we call those objects passive 
on which our activity is exercised, inasmuch as they do not 
spontaneously aim at the end which we make them serve. In 
a word, man is active and the means which he employs are 
called passive. These concepts, put absolutely, lose all mean- 
ing. In particular, being is not active; in order for there to be 
an end and means, there must be being. For an even stronger 
reason it can not be passive, for in order to be passive, it must 
be. The self-consistency of being is beyond the active as it is 
beyond the passive. 

Being is equally beyond negation as beyond afiSrmation. 
Affirmation is always affirmation of something; that is, the act 
of affirming is distinguished from the thing affir med. But if 
we suppose an affirmation in which the affirmed comes to 
fulfill the aflfirming and is confused with it, this affirmation can 
not be affirmed — owing to too much of plenitude and the 
immediate inherence of the noema in the noesis. It is there 
that we^ find being — ^if we are to define it more clearly — ^in 
connection with consciousness. It is the noema in the noesis; 
mat is, the inherence in itself without the least distance, 
rom this point of view, we should not call it “ imm anence,” 
or immanence in spite of all connection with self is stffl 
that very slight withdrawal which can be realized — away from 
me self. But being is not a connection with itself. It is itself. 
t IS an immanence which can not realize itself, an aflfirma- 
lon which can^ not affirm itself, an activity which can not 
act, because it is glued to itself. Everything happens as if , in 
order to free the aflfirmation of self from the heart of being, 



28 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

there is necessary a decompression of being. Let us not, how- 
ever, thintc that being is merely one undifferentiated self- 
aflSrmation; the undifferentiation of the in-itseif is beyond an 
infinity of self-aflSrmations, inasmuch as there is an infimty of 
modes of self-affirming. We may summarize these first conclu- 
sions by saying that being is in itself. 

But if being is in itself, this means that it does not refer 
to itself as self-consciousness does. It is this self. It is itself 
so completely that the perpetual reflection which constitutes 
the self is dissolved in an identity. That is why being is at 
bottom beyond the self, and our first formula can be only an 
approximation due to the requirements of language. In fact 
being is opaque to itself precisely because it is filled with 
itself. This can be better expressed by saying that being is 
what it is. This statement is in appearance strictly analytical. 
Actually it is far from being reduced to that principle of 
identity which is the unconditioned principle of all analytical 
judgments. First the formula designates a particular re- 
gion of being, that of being in-itself. We shall see that the 
being of for-itself is defined, on the contrary, as being what 
it is not and not being what it is. The question here then is 
of a regional principle and is as such synthetical. Furthermore 
it is necessary to oppose this formula — being in-itself is what 
it is — -to that which designates the being of consciousness. 
The latter in fact, as we shall see, has to be what it is. 

This instructs us as to the special meaning which must 
be given to the “is” in the phrase, being is what it is. From 
the moment that beings exist who have to be what they are, 
the fact of being what they are is no longer a purely axiomatic 
characteristic; it is a contingent principle of being in-itself. In 
this sense, the principle of identity, the principle of analytical 
judgments, is also a regional synthetical principle of being. It 
desi^ates the opacity of being-in-itself. This opacity has 
nothing to do with our position in relation to the in-itself; it 
is not that we are obliged to apprehend it and to observe it 
because we are “without,” Being-in-itself has no within which 
is opposed to a without and which is analogous to a judgment, 
a law, a consciousness of itself. The in-itself has nothing 
secret; it is solid {massif}. In a sense we can desig- 
Mte it as a synthesis. But it is the most indissoluble of all: 
the synthesis of itself with itself. 

"^e result is evidently that being is isolated in its being 
an that it does not enter into any connection with what is 



THE PURSUIT OF BEING 


29 


not itself. Transition, becoming, anything which permits us 
to say that being is not yet what it will be and that it is 
already what it is not — all that is forbidden on principle. For 
being is the being of becoming and due to this fact it is 
beyond becoming. It is what it is. This means that by itself 
it can not even be what it is not; we have seen indeed that it 
can encompass no negation. It is full positivity. It knows no 
otherness; it never posits itself as other-than-another-being. 
It can support no connection with the other. It is itself in- 
definitely and it exhausts itself in being. From this point of 
view we shall see later that it is not subject to temporality. 
It is, and when it gives way, one can not even say that it no 
longer is. Or, at least, a consciousness can be conscious of it 
as no longer being, precisely because consciousness is temporal. 
But being itself does not exist as a lack there where it was; 
the full positivity of being is re-formed on its giving way. It 
was and at present other beings are: that is all. 

Finally — ^this will be our third characteristic — ^being- 
in-itself is. This means that being can neither be derived from 
the possible nor reduced to the necessary. Necessity concerns 
the connection between ideal propositions but not that of 
existents. An existing phenomenon can never be derived from 
another existent qua existent. This is what we shall call the 
contingency of being-in-itself. But neither can being-in-itself 
be derived from a possibility. The possible is a structure of the 
for-itself; that is, it belongs to the other region of being. Be- 
ing-in-itself is never either possible or impossible. It is. This is 
what consciousness expresses in anthropomorphic terms by 
saying that being is superfluous {de trop) — ^that is, that con- 
sdousness absolutely can not derive being from anything, 
either from another being, or from a possibility, or from ' a 
necessary law. Uncreated, without reason for being, without 
any connection with another being, being-in-itself is de trop 
for eternity. 

Being is. Being is in-itself. Being is what it is. These are 
the three characteristics which the preliminary examination of 
the phenomenon of being allows us to assign to the being of 
phenomena. For the moment it is impossible to push our 
investigation further. This is not yet the examination of the 
in~itself — ^which is never anything but what it is — ^which will 
allow us to establish and to explain its relations "with the 
for-itself. Thus we have left “appearances” and have been led 
progressively to posit two types of being, the in-itself and the 


30 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


for-itself, concerning which we have as yet only superficial 
and incomplete information. A multitude of questions remain 
unanswered; What is the ultimate meaning of these two 
types of being? For what reasons do they both belong to 
being in general? What is the meaning of that being which 
includes within itself these two radically separated regions of 
being? If idealism and realism both fail to explain the rela- 
tions which in fact unite these regions which in theory are 
without communication, what other solution can we find for 
this problem? And how can the being of the phenomenon be 
transphenomenal? 

It is to attempt to reply to these questions that I have 
written the present work. 



PART ONE 


The Problem of Mothing)tess 






CHAPTER ONE 


The Origin of Negation 


I. THE QUESTION 

of ^oing. But we have been 
^V^se since we have not been able to 
which wAk ‘^°il"^otion between the two regions of being 
chntpn discover^ No doubt this is because we have 

facp^r,Jh ^"fo^o^ate approach. Descartes found himself 
the rpln^;r. problem when he had to deal with 

for the cnh body. He planned then to look 

substance a where the union of thinking 

is in the inT substance was actually effected — ^that 

To be sure, our 

iuiarinafinn a Descartes and we do not conceive of 

^at it i<? nrvf retain is the reminder 

‘elation in separate the two terms of a 

is a sv^m^si^rn 

cot be coverert Consequently the results of analysis can 

Lanorfe ^Sain by the moments of this s)mthesis. 
something nnt ^ abstraction is made when 

^ in an existing in isolation is thought of 

can cyJc» u *Hie concrete by contrast is a totality 

inr him red ha ^ alone. Husserl is of the same opinion; 

form. On til ^ ^^^nction because color can not exist with- 

its determinatm^ ^ spatial-temporal thing, with 

ns, IS an example of the concrete. From 


33 



34 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


this point of view, consciousness is an abstraction since it 
conceals within itself an ontological source in the region of 
the in-itself, and conversely the phenomenon is likewise an 
abstraction since it must “appear” to consciousness. The con- 
crete can be only the synthetic totality of which consciousness, 
like the phenomenon, constitutes only moments. The concrete 
is man within the world in that specific union of man with the 
world which Heidegger, for example, calls “being-in-the- 
world.” We deliberately begin with the abstract if we question 
“experience” as Kant does, inquiring into the conditions of 
its possibility — or if we effect a phenomenological reduction 
like Husserl, who would reduce the world to the state of the 
noema-correlate of consciousness. But we will no more 
succeed in restoring the concrete by the summation or or- 
ganization of the elements which we have abstracted from it 
than Spinoza can reach substance by the infinite summation 
of its modes. 


The relation of the regions of being is an original emer- 
gence^ and is a part of the very structure of these beings. But 
we discovered this in our first observations. It is enough 
now to open our eyes and question ingenuously this total- 
ity which is man-in-the-world. It is by the description of this 
totmity that we shall be able to reply to these two questions; 
(1) What is the synthetic relation which we call being-in- 
fee-world? (2) What must man and fee world be in order 
tor a relation between them to be possible? In truth, the two 
que^ions are interdependent, and we can not hope to reply 
separately. But each type of human conduct, being 

^ ’^^^^ase for us simul- 

taneously man, the world, and the relation which unites them, 

SaHfS envisage these forms of conduct as 

A' 1 ^ apprehensible and not as subjective affects 

We Of collection, 

nattem of ourselves to the study of a single 

Sand '^o^'cary to describe 

profound meaning of fee rela- 

qtem which can serve us as a guiding thread in cfur 

the desired 

is at tS; ^ apprehend him such as he 

tms moment m fee world, I establish that he stands be- 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


35 


fore being in an attitude of interrogation. At the very moment 
when I ask, “Is there any conduct which can reveal to me the 
relation of man with the world?” I pose a question. This 
question I can consider objectively, for it matters little 
whether the questioner is myself or the reader who reads my 
work and who is questioning along with me. But on the 
other hand, the question is not simply the objective totality 
of the words printed on this page; it is indifferent to the 
symbols which express it. In a word, it is a human attitude 
Med with meaning. What does this attitude reveal to us? 

In every question we stand before a being which we are 
questioning. Every question presupposes a being who ques- 
tions and a being which is questioned. This is not the original 
relation of man to being-in-itself, but rather it stands within 
the limitations of this relation and takes it for granted. On 
the other hand, this being which we question, we question 
about something. That about which I question the being 
participates in the transcendence of being. I question being 
about its ways of being or about its being. From this point of 
view the question is a kind of expectation; I expect a reply 
from the being questioned. That is, on the basis of a pre- 
interrogafive familiarity with being, I expect from this being a 
revelation of its being or of its way of being. The reply will 
be a “yes” or a “no.” It is the existence of these two equally 
objective and contradictory possibilities which on principle 
distinguishes the question from affirmation or negation. 
There are questions which on the surface do not permit a 
negative reply — ^like, for example, the one which we put 
earlier, “What does this attitude reveal to us?” But actually we 
see that it is always possible with questions of this t5q)e to 
reply, “Nothing” or “Nobody” or “Never.” Thus at the mo- 
ment when I ask, “Is there any conduct which can reveal to 
relation of man with the world?” I admit on 
principle the possibility of a negative reply such as, “No, such 
a conduct does not exist.” This means that we admit to being 

seed with the transcendent fact of the non-existence of such 
conduct 

One will perhaps be tempted not to believe in the objec- 
®^^^®rice of a non-being; one will say that in this case 
e act simply refers me to my subjectivity; I would learn 
om the transcendent being that the conduct sought is a pure 

place, to call this conduct a pure 
oa is to disguise the negation without removing it “To 



36 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

be pure fiction” is equivalent here to “to be only a fiction.” 
Consequently to destroy the reality of the negation is to cause 
the reality of the reply to disappear. This feply, in fact, is 
the very being which gives it to me; that is, reveals the nega- 
tion to me. There exists then for the questioner the per- 
manent objective possibility of a negative reply. In relation to 
this possibility the questioner, by the very fact that he is 
questioning, posits himself as in a state of indetermination; 
he does not know whether the reply will be affirmative or 
negative. Thus the question is a bridge set up between two 
non-beings; the non-being of knowing in man, the possibility 
of non-being of being in transcendent being. Finally the 
question implies the existence of a truth. By the very question 
the questioner affirms that he expects an objective reply, such 
that we can say of it, “It is thus and not otherwise.” In a 
word the truth, as differentiated from being, introduces a 
third non-being as determining the question — ^the non-being 
of limitation. This triple non-being conditions every question 
and in particular the metaphysical question, which is our 
question. 

We set out upon our pursuit of being, and it seemed to 
us that the series of our questions had led us to the heart of 
being. But behold, at the moment when we thought we were 
arriving at the goal, a glance cast on the question itself has 
revealed to us suddenly that we are encompassed with noth- 
ingness. The permanent possibility of non-being, outside us 
and within, conditions our questions about being. Further- 
more it is non-beiog which is going to limit the reply. What 
being will be must of necessity arise on the basis of what it is 
not. Whatever being is, it will allow this formulation; “Being 
is that and outside of that, nothing.” 

Thus a new component of the real has just appeared to 
^non-being. Our problem is thereby complicated, for we 
may no longer limit our inquiry to the relations of the human 
being to^ being in-itself, but must include also the relations of 
being with non-being and the relations of human non-being 
with transcendent-being. But let us consider further. 


n. NEGATIONS 

Someone will object that being-in-itself can not furnish neg- 
ative replies. Did not we ourselves say that it. was beyond 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


37 


affirmation as beyond negation? Furthermore ordinary ex- 
perience reduced to itself does not seem to disclose any non- 
being to us. I think that there are fifteen hundred francs in 
my wallet, and I find only thirteen hundred; that does not 
mea'n, someone will tell us, that experience had discovered 
for me the non-being of fifteen hundred francs but simply 
that I have counted thirteen hundred-franc notes. Negation 
proper (we are told) is unthinkable; it could appear only on 
the level of an act of judgment by which I should establish a 
comparison between the result anticipated and the result ob- 
tained. Thus negation would be simply a quality of judg- 
ment and the expectation of the questioner would be an ex- 
pectation of the judgment-response. As for Nothingness, this 
would derive its origin from negative judgments; it would be 
a concept establishing the transcendent unity of all these judg- 
ments, a propositional function of the type, “X is not.” 

We see where this theory is leading; its proponents would 
make us conclude that being-in-itself is full positivity and 
does not contain in itself any negation. This negative judg- 
ment, on the other hand, by virtue of being a subjective act, 
is strictly identified with the affirmative judgment. They can 
not see that Kant, for example, has distinguished in its in- 
ternal texture the negative act of judgment from the affirma- 
tive act. In each case a synthesis of concepts is operative; 
that synthesis, which is a concrete and full event of psychic 
life, is operative here merely in the manner of the copula “is” 
and there in the manner of the copula “is not.” In the same 
way the manual operation of sorting out (separation) and the 
manual operation of assembling (union) are two objective 
conducts which possess the same reality of fact. Thus negation 
would be “at the end” of the act of judgment without, how- 
ever, being “in” being. It is like an unreal encompassed by 
two full realities neither of which claims . it; being-in-itself, 
questioned about negation, refers to judgment, since being 
is only what it is — and judgment, a wholly psychic positivity, 
refers to being since judgment formulates a negation which 
concerns being and which consequently is transcendent 
Negation, the result of concrete psychic operations, is sup- 
ported in existence by these very operations and is incapable 
of existing by itself; it has the existence of a noema-corre- 
iate; its esse resides exactly in its percipi. Nothingness, the 
conceptual unity of negative judgments, can not have the 



38 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

slightest trace of reality, save that which the Stoics confer on 
their “lecton.”’^ Can we accept this concept? 

The question can be put in these terms: Is negation as the 
structure of the judicative proposition at the origin of 
nothingness? Or on the contrary is nothingness as the 
ture of the real, the origin and foundation of negation? 
Thus the problem of being had referred us first to that of 
the question as a human attitude, and the problem of the 
question now refers us to that of the being of negation. 

It is evident that non-being always appears within the 
limits of a human expectation. It is because I expect to find 
fifteen hundred francs that I find only thirteen hundred. It is 
because a physicist expects a certain verification of his 
hypothesis that nature can tell him no. It would be in vain to 
deny that negation appears on the original basis of a relation 
of man to the world. The world does not disclose its non- 
beings to one who has not first posited them as possibilities. 
But is this to say that these non-beings are to be reduced to 
pure subjectivity? Does this mean to say that we ought to give 
them the importance and the type of existence of the Stoic 
“lecton,” of Husserl’s noema? We think not 

First it is not true that negation is only a quality of 
judgment. The question is formulated by an interrogative 
judgment, but it is not itself a judgment; it is a pre- 
judicative attitude. I can question by a look, by a ges- 
ture.^ In posing a question I stand facing being in a 
certain way and this relation to being is a relation of 
being; the judgment is only one optional expression of it 
At the same time it is not necessarily a person whom the 
questioner questions about being; this conception of the ques- 
tion by making of it an intersubjective phenomenon, detaches 
, it from the being to which it adheres and leaves it in the 
air as pure modality of dialogue. On the contrary, we must 
consider the question in dialogue to be only a particular 
species of the genus “question”; the being in question is not 
necessarily a thinking being. If my car breaks down, it is the 
carburetor , the spark plugs, etc., that I question. If my watch 
stops, ^ I can question the watchmaker about the cause of the 
stopping, but it is the various mechanisms of the watch that 
the Watchmaker will in turn question. What I expect 
from the^ carburetor, what the watchmaker expects from 

Tr. An abstraction or something with purely nominal existence — like 
space or time. 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


39 


the works of the watch, is BOt a judgment; it is a dis- 
closure of being on the basis of which we can make a judg- 
ment. And if I expect a disclosure of being, I am prepared at 
the same time for the eventuality of a disclosure of a non- 
being. If I question the carburetor, it is because I consider it 
possible that “there is nothing there*' in the carburetor. Thus 
my question by its nature envelops a certain pre-judicative 
comprehension of non-being; it is in itself a relation of being 
with non-being, on the basis of the original transcendence; 
that is, in a relation of being with being. 

Moreover if the proper nature of the question is obscured 
by the fact that questions are frequently put by one man to 
other men, it should be pointed out here that there are 
numerous non-judicative conducts which present this im- 
mediate comprehension of non-being on the basis of being — 
in its original purity. If, for example, we consider destruction, 
we must recognize that it is an activity which doubtless could 
utilize judgment as an instrument but which can not be de- 
fined as uniquely or even primarily judicative. “Destruction” 
presents the same structure as “the question.” In a sense, cer- 
tainly, man is the only being by whom a destruction can be 
accomplished. A geological plication, a storm do not destroy 
— or at least they do not destroy directly; they merely modify 
the distribution of masses of beings. There is no less 
after the storm than before. There is something else. Even this 
expression is improper, for to posit otherness there must be 
a witness who can retain the past in some manner and com- 
pare it to the present in the form of no longer. In the absence 
of this witness, there is being before as after the storm — that 
is all. If a cyclone can bring about the death of certain living 
beings, this death will be destruction only if it is experienced 
as such. In order for destruction to exist, there must be first 
a relation of man to being — i.e., a transcendence; and within 
the limits of this relation, it is necessary that man apprehend 
one being. as destructible. This supposes a limiting cutting 
mto being by a being, which, as we saw in connection with 
mth, is already a process of nihilation. The being under con- 
nderation is that and outside of that nothing. The gunner who 
has been assi^ed an objective carefully points his gun in a 
certain direction excluding all others. But even this would 
still be nothing unless the being of the gunner’s objective is 
revealed^ as fragile. And what is fragility if not a certain 
probability of non-being for a given being under determined 



40 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

circumstances. A being is fragile if it carries in its_ bemg a 
definite possibility of non-being. But once again it is 
through man that fragUity comes into being, for the mdivid- 
ualizing limitation which we mentioned earlier is the condi- 
tion of fragility; one being is fragile and not all being, for 
the latter is beyond all possible destruction. Thus the relation 
of individualizing limitation which man enters into with one 
being on the original basis of his relation to being causes 
fragility to enter into this being as the appearance of a per- 
manent possibility of non-being. But this is not all. In order 
for destructibility to exist, man must determine himself in 
the face of this possibility of non-being, either positively or 
negatively; he must either take the necessary measures^ to 
realize it (destruction proper) or, by a negation of non-being, 
to maintain it always on the level of a simple possibility (by 
preventive measures). Thus it is man who renders cities de- 
structible, precisely because he posits them as fragile and as 
precious and because he adopts a system of protective meas- 
ures with regard to them. It is because of this ensemble of 
measures that an earthquake or a volcanic eruption can de- 
stroy these cities or these human constructions. The original 
meaning and aim of war are contained in the smallest building 
of man. It is necessary then to recognize that destruction is 
an essentially human thing and that it is man who destroys 
his cities through the agency of earthquakes or directly, who 
destroys his ships through the agency of cyclones or directly. 
But at the same time it is necessary to acknowledge that 
destruction supposes a pre-judicative comprehension of 
nothingness as such and a conduct in the face of nothingness. 
In addition destruction, although coming into being through 
man, is an objective fact and not a thought Fragility has 
been impressed upon the very being of this vase, and its de- 
struction would be an irreversible absolute event which I could 
only verify. There is a transphenomenality of non-being as of 
being. The examination of “destruction” leads us then to the 
same results as the examination of “the question.” 

But if we wish to decide with certainty, we need only to 
consider an example of a negative judgment and to ask our- 
selves whether it causes non-being to appear at the '■heart of 
being or merely limits itself to determining a prior revelation. 
I have an appointment with Pierre at four o’clock. I arrive 
^ quarter of an hour late. Pierre is always punctual. 
WiU he have waited for me? I look at the room, the patrons. 



41 


r 

? . THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


[ and I say, “He is not here.” Is there an intuition of Pierre’s 
' absence, or does negation indeed enter in only with judgment? 
At first sight it seems absurd to speak here of intuition since 
to be exact there could not be an intuition of nothing and 
since the absence of Pierre is this nothing.^ Popular con- 
sciousness, however, bears witness to this intuition. Do we not 
■ say, for example, “I suddenly saw that he was not there.” 
Is this just a matter of misplacing the negation? Let us look a 
little closer. 

It is certain that the cafe by itself with its patrons, its 
tables, its booths, its- mirrors, its light, its smoky atmosphere, 
and the sounds of voices, rattling saucers, and footsteps which 
fill it— the cafe is a fullness of being. And all the intuitions 
of detail which I can have are filled by these odors, these 
sounds, these colors, all phenomena which have a trans- 
phenomenal being. Similarly Pierre’s actual presence in a 
place which I do not know is also a plenitude of being. We 
seem to have found fullness everywhere. But we must observe 
that in perception there is always the construction of a figure 
on a ground. No one object, no group of objects is especially 
designed to be organized as specifically either ground or 
figure; all depends on the direction of my attention. When I 
enter this caf4 to search for Pierre, there is formed a synthetic 


organization of all the objects in the cafe, on the ground of 
which Pierre is given as about to appear. This organization of 
the cafe as the ground is an original nihilation. Each element 
of the setting, a person, a table, a chair, attempts to isolate 
itself, to lift itself upon the ground constituted by the totality 
of the other objects, only to fall back once more into the 
, nndifferentiation of this ground; it melts into the ground. For 
fte ground is that which is seen only in addition, that which 
object of a purely marginal attention. Thus the original 
nihfiation of all the fibres which appear and are swallowed 
Up in the total neutrality of a ground is the necessary condi- 
lon for the appearance of the principle figure, which is here 
e person of Pierre. This nihilation is given to my intuition; 
' successive disappearance of all the objects 

, nich I look at— in particular of the faces, which detain me 
r an instant (Could this be Pierre?) and which as quickly 

because they “are not” the face of 
triit 5 or, ®^®^beless if I should finally discover Pierre, my in- 
would be filled by a solid element, I should be sud- 


42 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

denly arrested by his face and the whole caf6 would organ- 
ize itself around him as a discrete presence. 

But now Pierre is not here. This does not mean that I 
discover his absence in some precise spot in the establishment. 
In fact Pierre is absent from the whole cafe; his absence fixes 
the cafe in its evanescence; the cafe remains ground; it persists 
in offering itself as an undifferentiated totality to my only 
marginal attention; it slips into the background; it pursues its 
nihilation. Only it makes itself ground . for a determined 
figure; it carries the figure everywhere in front of it, presents 
the figure everywhere to me. This figure which slips constantly 
between my look and the solid, real objects of the cafe is 
precisely a perpetual disappearance; it is Pierre raising him- 
self as nothingness on the ground of the nihilation of the 
cafe. So that what is offered to intuition is a flickering of 
nothingness; it is the nothingness of the ground, the nihila- 
tion of which summons and demands the appearance of the 
figure, and it is the figure — the nothingness which slips as a 
nothing to the surface of the ground. It serves as foundation 
for the judgment — “Pierre is not here.” It is in fact the 
intuitive apprehension of a double nihilation. To be sure 
Pierre’s absence supposes an original relation between me and 
this caf6; there is an infinity of people who are without any 
relation with this cafe for want of a real expectation which 
establishes their absence. But, to be exact, I myself expected to 
see Pierre, and my expectation has caused the absence of 
Pierre to happen as a real event concerning this cafd. It is an 
objective fact at present that I have discovered this absence, 
and it presents itself as a synthetic relation between Pierre and 
the setting in which I am looking for him. Pierre absent 
haunts this cafe and is the condition of its self-nihilating 
organization as ground. By contrast, judgments which I can 
make subsequently to amuse myself, such as, “Wellington is 
not in this cafe, Paul Valery is no longer here, etc ." — these 
have a purely abstract meaning; they are pure applications 
of the principle of negation without real or efficacious founda- 
tion, and they never succeed in establishing a real relation^ 
between the cafe and Wellington or Vale^}^ Here the rela-/ 
tion “is not” is merely thought. This example is sufficient' 
to show that non-being does not come to things by a negative 
judgment; it is the negative judgment, on the contrary, which 
is conditioned and supported by non-being. 

How could it be otherwise? How could we even con- 


THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


43 


ceive of the negative form of judgment if all is plenitude of 
.being and positivity? We believed for a moment that the 
negation could arise from the comparison instituted between 
the result anticipated and the result obtained. But let us look 
at that comparison. Here is an original judgment, a concrete, 
positive psychic act which establishes a fact: “There are 
1300 francs in my wallet.” Then there is another which is 
something else, no longer it but an establishing, of- fact and 
an afBrmation: “I expected to find 1500 francs.” There 
we have real and objective facts, psychic, and positive events, 
affirmative judgments. Where are we to place negation? Are 
we to believe that it is a pure and simple application of a 
category? And do we wish to hold that the mind in itself 
possesses the not as a form of sorting out and separation? 
But in this case we remove even the slightest suspicion of 
negativity from the negation. If we admit that the category of 
the “not” which exists in fact in the mind and is a positive 
and concrete process to brace and systematize our knowledge, 
if we admit &st that it is suddenly released by the presence 
in us of certain affirmative judgments and then that it comes 
suddenly to mark with its seal certain thoughts which result 
from these judgments — ^by these considerations we will have 
carefully stripped negation of all negative function. For nega- 
tion is a refusal of existence. By means of it a being (or a way 
of being) is posited, then thrown back to nothingness. If 
negation is a category, if it is only a sort of plug set in- 
differently on certain judgments, then how will we explain 
the fact that it can nihilate a being, cause it suddenly to arise, 
and then appoint it to be thrown back to non-being? If 
prior judgments establish fact, like those which we have taken 
for examples, negation must be like a free discovery, it must 
tear us away from this wall of positivity which encircles 
ys. Negation is an abrupt break in continuity which can not 
in any case result from prior affirmations; it is an original and 
ureducible event. Here we are in the realm of consciousness. 
Consciousness moreover can not produce a negation except 
in the form of consciousness of negation. No category can 
mhabit” consciousness and reside there in the manner of a 
thing.^ The not, as an abrupt intuitive discovery, appears as 
consciousness (of being), consciousness of the not. In a word, 
being is everywhere, it is not only Nothingness which, as 
ergson maintains, is inconceivable; for negation will never 
e denved from being. The necessary condition for our saying 



44 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

not is that non-being be a perpetual presence in us and outside 
of us, that nothingness haunt being. 

But where does nothingness come from? If it is the 
original condition of the questioning attitude and more gen- 
erally of all philosophical or scientific inquiry, what is the 
original relation of the human being to nothingness? What 
is the original nihilating conduct? 

m. THE dialectical concept of 

NOTHINGNESS 

It is still too soon for us to hope to disengage the meaning 
of this nothingness, against which the question has suddenly 
thrown us. But there are several conclusions which we can 
formulate even now. In particular it would be worthwhile to 
determine the relations between being and that non-being 
which haunts it. We have established a certain parallelism 
between the types of conduct man adopts in the face of being 
and those which he maintains in the face of Nothingness, 
and we are immediately tempted to consider being and non- 
being as two complementary components of the real — ^like 
dark and light. In short we would then be dealing with two 
strictly contemporary notions which would somehow be united 
in the production of existents and which it would be useless 
to consider' in isolation. Pure being and pure non-being would 
be two abstractions which could be reunited only on the basis 
of concrete realities. 

Such is certainly the point of view of Hegel. It is in the 
Logic in fact that he studies the relations of Being and Non- 
Being, and he calls the Logic “The system of the pure de- 
terminations of thought,” He defines more fully by saying, 
“Thoughts as they are ordinarily represented, are not pure 
thoughts, for by a being which is thought, we understand 
a being of which the content is an empirical content. In logic 
thoughts are apprehended in such a way that they have no 
other content than the content of pure thought, which con- 
tent is engendered by it.”^ To be sure, these determination^ 
are “what is deepest in things” but at the same time when one 
considers them “in and for themselves,” one deduces them 
from thought itself and discovers in them their truth. How- 

J Introduction, v. E. c. 2 cd. E. §xxiv, quoted by Lefebvre: Morceaux 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


45 


ever the effort of Hegelian logic is to “make clear the in- 
adequacy of the notions (which it) considers one by one and 
the necessity, m order to understand them, of raising each to 
' a more complete notion which surpasses them while in- 
tegrating them.”* 

One can apply to Hegel what Le Senne said of the philoso- 
phy of Hamelin: “Each of the lower terms depends on the 
higher term, as the abstract on the concrete which is 
necessary for it to realize itself.” The true concrete for Hegel 
is the Existent with its essence; it is the Totality produced by 
the synthetic integration of all the abstract moments which 
'are surpassed in it by requiring their complement In this 
sense Being will be the most abstract of abstractions and the 
poorest, if we consider it in itself — ^that is, by separating it 
from its surpassing toward Essence. In fact “Being is related 
to Essence as the immediate to the mediate. Things in general 
‘are,’ but their being consists in manifesting their essence. 
Being passes into Essence. One can express this by saying, 
‘Being presupposes Essence.’ Although Essence appears in 
relation to Being as mediated, Essence is nevertheless the true 
origin. Being returns to its ground; Being is surpassed in 
Essence.”^ 

Thus Being cut from Essence which is its ground becomes 
“mere empty immediacy.” This is how the Phenomenology 
of Mind defines it by presenting pure Being “from the point 
of view of truth” as the immediate. If the beginning of logic 
is to be the immediate, we shall then find beginning in 
Being, ^ which is ’ “the indetermination which precedes all 
determination, the undetermined as the absolute point of 
departure,” 

But Being thus undetermined immediately “passes into” 
its opposite. “This pure Being,” writes Hegel in Logic (of the 
Encylopaedia) , is “pure abstraction and consequently absolute 
neption, which taken in its immediate moment is also non- 
being.” Is Nothingness not in fact simple identity with itself, 
complete emptiness, absence of determinations and of con- 
tent? Pure being and pure nothingness are then the same 
thmg. Or rather it is true to say that they are different; but 
as here the difference is not yet a determined difference — 

^ de V Abstraction, p. 25 (Presses Universitaires, 

betweea 1808 and 1811, to serve 
c asis for his course at the gymnasium at Nuremberg. 



46 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

for being and non-being constitute the immediate moment 
such as it is in them—this difference can not be named; it 
is only a pure opinion.”® This means concretely that 'Hhere 
is nothing in heaven or on earth which does not contain in 
itself being and nothingness.”^ 

It is still too soon for us to discuss the Hegelian concept 
itself; we need all the results of our study in order to take a 
position regarding this. It is appropriate here to observe 
only that being is reduced by Hegel to a signification of 
the existent. Being is enveloped by essence, which is its 
foundation and origin. Hegel’s whole theory is based on the 
idea that a philosophical procedure is necessary in order at 
the outset of logic to rediscover the immediate in terms of 
the mediated, the abstract in terms of the concrete on which 
it is grounded. But we have already remarked that being 
does not hold the same relation to the phenomenon as the 
abstract holds to the concrete. Being is not one “structure 
among others,” one moment of the object; it is the very 
condition of all structures and of all moments. It is the 
ground on which the characteristics of the phenomenon will 
manifest themselves. Similarly it is not admissible that the 
being of things “consists in manifesting their essence.” For 
then a being of that being would be necessary. Furthermore ,if 
the being of things “consisted” in manifesting their essence, 
it would be hard to see how Hegel could determine a pure 
moment of Being where we could not find at least a trace of 
that original structure. It is true that the understanding de- 
termines pure being, isolates and fixes it in its very deter- 
mmations. But if surpassing toward essence constitutes the 
original character of being, and if the understanding 
is limited to “determining and persevering in the determina- 
tions,” we can not see precisely how it does not determine 
being as “consisting in manifesting.” 

It might be said in defense of Hegel that every determina- 
tion is negation. But the understanding in this sense is lim- 
ited to denying that its object is other than it is. That is 
suflScient doubtless to prevent all dialectical process, but not 
enough to effect its disappearance at the threshold of its sur- 
passing. In so far as being surpasses itself toward something 
else, it is not subject to the determinations of the under- 
standing. But in so far as it surpasses itself — ^that is, in so far 

® Hegel, P. c. E, 988. 

® Hegel: Greater Logic, chap. I. 


THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


47 


as it is in its very depths the origin of its own surpassing — 
being must on the contrary appear such as it is to the under- 
standing which fixes it in its own determinations. To affirm 
that being is only what it is would be at least to leave being 
intact so far as it is its own surpassing. We see here the am- 
biguity of the Hegelian notion of “surpassing” which some- 
times appears to be an upsurge from the inmost depth of^the 
being considered and at other times an external movement by 
wWch this being is involved. It is not enough to affirm that 
the understanding finds in being only what it is; we must also 
explain how being, which is what it is, can be only that. Such 
an explanation would derive its legitimacy from the considera- 
tion of the phenomenon of being as such and not from the 
negating process of the understanding. 

' But what needs examination here is especially Hegel’s 
statement that being and nothingness constitute two opposites, 
the difference between which on the level of abstraction 
under consideration is only a simple “opinion.” 

To oppose being to nothingness as thesis and antithesis, 
as Hegel does, is to suppose that they are logically contem- 
porary. Thus simultaneously two opposites arise as the two 
limiting terms of a logical series. Here we must note carefully 
that opposites alone can enjoy this simultaneity because they 
are equally positive (or equally negative). But non-being is 
not the opposite of being; it is its contradiction. This implies 
that logically nothingness is subsequent to being since it is 
being, first posited, then denied. It can not be therefore that 
beiag and non-being are concepts with the same content since 
on the contrary non-being supposes an irreducible mental act 
Whatever may be the original undifferentiation of being, non- 
being is that same undifferentiation denied. This permits 
Hegel to make being pass into nothingness; this is what by 
implication has introduced negation into his very definition of 
^ing. This is self-evident since any definition is negative, since 
Hegel has told us, making use of a statement of Spinoza’s, 
that omnis determinatio est negatio. And does he not write, 

h' matter what the determination or content is 

which would distinguish being from something else; whatever 
womd^ give it a content would prevent it from maintaining 
T purity. It is pure indetermination and emptiness, 
be apprehended in it.” 

Thus anyone who introduces negation into being from 



48 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

outside will discover subsequently that he makes it pass into 
non-being. But here we have a play on words involving the 
very idea of negation. For if I refuse to allow being any 
determination or content, I am nevertheless forced to affirm 
at least that it is. Thus, let anyone deny being whatever he 
wishes, he can not cause it not to be, thanks to the very fact 
that he denies that it is this or that. Negation can not touch 
the nucleus of being of Being, which is absolute plenitude 
and entire positivity. By contrast Non-being is a negation 
which aims at this nucleus of absolute density. Non-being 
is denied at the heart of Being. When Hegel writes, “(Being 
and nothingness) are empty abstractions, and the one is as 
empty as the other,”’' he forgets that emptiness is emptiness 
of something.® Being is empty of all other determination than 
identity with itself, but non-being is empty of being. In a 
word, we must recall here against Hegel that being is and 
that nothingness is not. 

Thus even though being can not be the support of any 
differentiated quality, nothingness is logically subsequent to 
it since it supposes being in order to deny it, since the irre- 
ducible quality of the not comes to add itself to that undiffer- 
entiated mass of being in order to release it. That does not 
mean only that we should refuse to put being and non-being 
on the same plane, but also that we must be careful never to 
posit nothingness as an original abyss from which being arose. 
The use which we make of the notion of nothingness in its 
familiar form always supposes a preliminary specification 
of being. It is striking in this connection that language fur- 
nishes us with a nothingness of things and a nothingness of 
human beings.® But the specification is, still more obvious in 
the majority of instances. We say, pointing to a particular 
collection of objects, “Touch nothing” which means, very 
precisely, nothing of that collection. Similarly, if we ques- 
tion someone on well-determined events in his private or 
public life, he may reply, “I know nothing.” And this nothing 
includes the totality of the facts on which we questioned him. 

^ P. c. 2 cd. E. §Lxxxvii. 

® It is so much the more strange in that Hegel is the first to have noted 
that “every negation is a determined negation”; that is, it depends on a 
content. 

« ” ~ as opposed to ne . . . personne = 

nobody,” which are equally fundamental negative expressions. Sartre here 
convemcntly has based his ontology on the exigencies of a purely French 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


49 


Even Socrates with his famous statement, “I know that I 
know nothing,” designates by this nothing the totality of 
being considered as Truth. 

If adopting for. the moment the point of view of naive 
cosmogonies, we tried to ask ourselves what “was there” 
before a world existed, and if we replied “nothing,” we 
would be forced to recognize that this “before” like this 
“nothing” is in effect retroactive. What we deny today, we 
who are established in being, is what there was of being be- 
fore this being. Negation here springs from a consciousness 
which is turned back toward the beginning. If we remove 
from this original emptiness its characteristic of being empty 
of this world and of every whole taking the form of a world, 
as well as its characteristic of before, which presupposes an 
after, then the veiy negation disappears, giving way to a total 
indetermination which it would be impossible to conceive, 
even and especially as a nothingness. Thus reversing the 
statement of Spinoza, we could say that every negation is 
determination. This means that being is prior to nothingness 
and establishes the ground for it By this we must understand 
not only that being has a logical precedence over nothingness 
but also that it is from being that nothingness derives con- 
cretely its efficacy. This is what we mean when we say that 
nothingness haunts being. That means that being has no 
need of nothingness in order to be conceived and that we 
can examine the idea of it exhaustively without finding there 
the least trace of nothingness. But on the other hand, 
nothingness, which is not, can have only a borrowed existence, 
and it gets its being from being. Its nothingness of being is 
encountered only within the limits of being, and the total 
disappearance of being would not be the advent of the reign 
of non-being, but on the contrary the concomitant disappear- 
ance of nothingness. Non-being exists only on the surface of 
being. 

IV. THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL CONCEPT 
OF NOTHINGNESS 

There is another possible way of conceiving being and 
nothingness as complements. One could view them as two 
equally necessary components of the real without making 
being “pass into” nothingness — ^as Hegel does — and without 



so BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

insisting on the posteriority of nothingness as we attempted 
to do. We might on the contrary emphasize the reciprocal 
forces of repulsion which being and non-being exercise on 
each other, the real in some way being the tension resulting 
from these antagonistic forces. It is toward this new concep- 
tion that Heidegger is oriented.” 

We need not look far to sec the progress which Hei- 
degger’s theory of nothingness has made over that of Hegel. 
First, being and non-being are no longer empty abstractions. 
Heidegger in his most important work has shown the legiti- 
macy of raising the question concerning being; the latter has 
no longer the character of a Scholastic universal which it still 
retained with Hegel. There is a meaning of being which must 
be clarified; there is a “pro-ontological comprehension” of 
being which is involved in every kind of conduct belonging 
to human reality” — i.e., in each of its projects. Similarly 
difficulties which customarily arise as soon os a philosopher 
touches on the problem of Nothingness are shown to be with- 
out foundation; they are important in so far as they limit the 
function of the understanding, and they .show simply that 
this problem is not within the province of the understand- 
ing. There exist on the other hand numerous attitudes of 
“human reality” which imply a “comprehension” of nothing- 
ness: hate, prohibitions, regret, etc. For Dasein there is 
even a permanent possibility of finding oneself “face to face” 
with nothingness and discovering it as a phenomenon: this 
possibility is anguish. 

Heidegger, while establishing the possibilities of a^ con- 
crete apprehension of Nothingness, never falls into the error 
which Hegel made; he does not preserve a being for Non- 
Being, not even an abstract being. Nothing is not; it nihilates 
itself.i^ It is supported and conditioned by transcendence. We 
know that for Heidegger the being of human reality is de- 
fined as “being-in-the-world.” The world is a synthetic cora- 

^0 Heidegger, Qu’ cst.ee que la metaphysique. (Translated by Corbin. Paris; 
GaUimard. 1938.) [“What Is Metaphysics?" Translated by R. F. C. Hull and 
Alan Crick. From Existence and Being, cd. by Werner Brock. Chicago: 
Henry Regncry. 1949.] 

“Tr. Heidegger uses the by now famous expression "Das Nlchts nichict" 
or "Nothing nothings." I think “nIhUatc” Is a closer equivalent to Sartre's 
ndantlse than “annihilate" because the fundamental meaning of die term 
is “to make nothing” rather than “to destroy or do aw.ay with.” Nlchtet, 
n£antise, and nihilate are all, of course, equally without foundation in die 
oictionanes of the respective languages. 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


51 


plex of instrumental realities inasmuch as they point one to 
another in ever widening circles, and inasmuch as man makes 
himself known in terms of this complex which he is. This 
means both that “human reality” springs forth invest^ with 
being and “finds itself” {sich befinden) in being — and also 
that, human reality causes being, which surrounds it, to be 
disposed around human reality in the form of the world. 

But human reality can make being appear as organized 
totality in tbe world only by surpassing being. All determina- 
tion for Heidegger is surpassing since it supposes a with- 
drawal taken from a particular point of view. This passing 
beyond the world, which is a condition of the very rising up 
of the world as such, is effected by the Dasein which directs 
the surpassing toward itself. The characteristic of selfness 
(Selbstheit) t in fact, is that man is always separated from 
what he is by all the breadth of the being which he is not. 
He makes himself known to himself from the other side of 
the world and he looks from the horizon toward himself to 
recover his inner being. Man is “a being of distances.” In 
the movement of turning inward which traverses all of being, 
being arises and organizes itself as the world without there 
being either priority of the movement over the world, or the 
world over the movement. But this appearance of the self 
beyond the world — that is, beyond the totality of the real — 
is an emergence of “human reality” in nothingness. It is in 
nothingness alone that being can be surpassed. At the same 
time it is from the point of view of beyond the world that 
being is organized into the world, which means on the one 
hand that human reality rises up as an emergence of being in 
non-being and on the other hand that the world is “suspended” 
in nothingness. Anguish is the discovery of this double, 
perpetual nihilation. It is in terms of this surpassing of the 
world that Dasein manages to realize the contingency of 
the world; that is, to raise the question, “How does it happen 
that there is something rather than nothing?” Thus the con- 
tingency of the world appears to human reality in so far as 
human reality has established itself in nothingness in order to 
apprehend the contingency. 

Here then is nothingness surrounding being on every 
side and at the same time expelled from being. Here nothing- 
ness is given as that by which the world receives its outlines 
as the world. Can this solution satisfy us? 

Certainly it can not be denied that the apprehension of 



52 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

the world qua world is a nihilation. From the moment the 
world appears qua world it gives itself as being only that. 
The necessary counterpart of this apprehension then xs indeed 
the emergence of “human reality’* in nothingness. But where 
does “human reality” get its power of emerging thus in non- 
being? Without a doubt Heidegger is right in insisting^ on 
the fact that negation derives its foundation from nothing- 
ness. But if nothingness provides a ground for negation, it is 
because nothingness envelops the not within itself as its 
essential structure. In otlier words, it is not as undiffer- 
entiated emptiness or as a disguised otherness^- tlxat nothing- 
ness provides the ground for negation. Nothingness stands 
at the origin of the negative judgment because it is itself 
negation. It founds the negation as an act because it is 
the negation as being. Nothingness can be nothingness only 
by nihilating itself expressly as nothingness of the world; 
that is, in its nihilation it must direct itself expressly toward 
this world in order to constitute itself as refusal of the world. 
Nothingness carries being in its heart But how does the 
emergence account for this nihilating refusal? Transcendence, 
which is “the pro-ject of self beyond,” is far from being 
able to establish nothingness; on the contrary, it is nothing- 
ness which is at the very heart of transcendence and which 
conditions it. 

Now the characteristic of Heidegger’s philosophy is to 
describe Dasein by using positive terms which hide the im- 
plicit negations. Dasein is “outside of itself, in the world”; 
it. is_ “a being of distances”; it is care; it is “its own possi- 
bilities,” etc. All this amounts to saying that Dasein “is not” 
in itself, that it “is not” in immediate proximity to itself, 
and that it “surpasses” the world inasmuch as it posits itself 
as not being in itself and as not being the world. In this 
sense Hegel is right rather than Heidegger when he states 
that Mind is the negative. Actually we can put to each of 
them the same question, phrased slightly differently. We 
should say to Hegel: “It is not sufficient to posit mind as 
mediation and the negative; it is necessary to demonstrate 
negativity as the structure of being of mind. What must mind 
be in order to be able to constitute itself as negative?” And 
we can ask the same question of Heidegger in these words: 

It negation is the original structure of transcendence, what 

“What Hegel would call “immediate otherness.” 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


53 


must be the original stracture of ‘human reality’ in order for 
it to be able to transcend the world?” In both cases we are 
shown a negating activity and there is no concern to ground 
this activity upon a negative being. Heidegger in addition 
makes of Nothingness a sort of intentional correlate of tran- 
scendence, without seeing that he has already inserted it into 
transcendence itself as its original structure. 

Furthermore what is the use of affirming that Nothing- 
ness provides the ground for negation, if it is merely to enable 
us to form subsequently a theory of non-being which by 
definition separates Nothingness from all concrete negation? 
If I emerge in nothingness beyond the world, how can this 
extra-mundane nothingness furnish a foundation for those 
little pools of non-being which we encounter each instant in 
the depth of being. I say, “Pierre is not there,” “I have no 
more money,” etc. Is it really necessary to surpass the world 
toward nothingness and to return subsequently to being in 
order to provide a ground for these everyday judgments? 
And how can the operation be affected? To accomplish it we 
are not required to make the world slip into nothingness; 
standing within the limits of being, we simply deny an attri- 
bute to a subject. 'Will someone say that each attribute re- 
fused, each being denied is taken up by one and the same 
extra-mundane' nothingness, that non-being is like the fullness 
of what is not, that the world is suspended in non-being as 
the real is suspended in the heart of possibilities? In this case 
each negation would necessarily have for origin a particular 
surpassiug: the surpassing of one being toward another. But 
vihat is this surpassing, if not simply the Hegelian mediation 
— and have we not already and in vain sought in Hegel the 
uihilating ground of the mediation? Furthermore even if the 
explanation is valid for the simple, radical negations which 
deny to a determined object any kind of presence in the 
depth of being (e.g., “Centaurs do not exist” — “There is 
no reason for him to be late” — ^“The ancient Greeks 
did not practice polygam}^’), negations which, if need be, 
can contribute to constituting Nothingness as a sort of geo- 
metrical place for unfulfilled projects, all inexact representa- 
tions, all vanished beings or those of which the idea is only a 
fiction even so this interpretation of non-being would no 
longer be valid for a certain kind of reality which is in truth 
the most frequent: namely, those negations which include 
non-being in their being. How can we hold that these are at 



54 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

once partly within the universe and partly outside in extra- 

mundane nothingness? ' ^ 

Take for example the notion of distance, which condi-" 
tions the determination of a location, the localization of a 
point. It is easy to see that it possesses a negative moment 
Two points are distant when they are separated by a certain’ 
length. The length, a positive attribute of a segment of a 
straight line, intervenes here by virtue of the negation of an 
absolute, undifferentiated proximity. Someone might perhaps 
seek to reduce distance to being only the length of the seg- 
ment of which the two points considered, A and B, would be 
the limits. But does he not see that he has changed the direc- 
tion of attention in this case and that he has, under cover of 
the same word, given another object to intuition? The or- 
ganized complex which is constituted by the segment with 
its two limiting terms can furnish actually two different 
objects to knowledge. We can in fact give the segment as 
immediate object of intuition, in which case this segment 
represents a full, concrete tension, of which the length is a 
positive attribute and the two points A and B appear only as 
a moment of the whole; that is, as they are implicated by the 
segment itself as its limits. Then the negation, expelled from 
the segment and its length, takes refuge in the two limits: to 
say that point B is a limit of the segment is to say that the 
segment does not extend beyond this point. Negation is 
here a secondary structure of the object. If, on the other 
hand, we direct our attention to the two points A and B, they 
arise as immediate objects of intuition on the ground of 
space. The segment disappears as a full, concrete object; it is 
apprehended in terms of two points as the emptiness, the 
negativity which separates them. Negation is not subject to 
the points, which cease to be limits in order to impregnate 
the very length of the segment with distance. Thus the total 
form constituted by the segment and its two limits with its 
inner structure of negation is capable of letting itself be 
apprehended in two ways. Rather there are two forms, and the 
condition of the appearance of the one is the disintegration of 
the other, exactly as in perception we constitute a particular 
object as a figure by rejecting another so as to make of it a 
ground, and conversely. In both instances we find the same 
quantity of negation which at one time passes into the notion 
of limits and at another into the notion of distance, but 
which m.each case can not be suppressed. Will someone 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


55 


object that the idea of distance is psychological and that 
it designates only the extension which must be cleared in 
order to go from point A to point B? We shall reply that 
the same negation is included in this to clear since this no- 
tion expresses precisely the passive resistance of the remote- 
ness. We will willingly admit with Heidegger that “human 
reality” is “remote-from-itself”; that is, that it rises in the 
world as that which creaites distances and at the same time 
causes them to be removed {ent-f emend) . But this remote- 
ness-from-self, even if it is the necessary condition in order 
that there may be remoteness in general, envelops remoteness 
in itself as the negative structure which must be surmounted. 
It will be useless to attempt to reduce distance to the simple 
result of a measurement. What has become evident in the 
course of the preceding discussion is that the two points and 
the segment which is enclosed between them have the indissol- 
uble unity of what the Germans call a Gestalt. Negation is the 
cement which realizes this unity. It defines precisely the 
immediate relation which connects these two points and 
which presents them to intuition as the indissoluble unity of 
the distance. This negation can be covered over only by claim- 
ing to reduce distance to the measurement of a length, for 
negation is the raison d’etre of that measurement. 

What we have just shown by the examination of distance, 
we could just as well have brought out by describing realities 
like absence, change, otherness, repulsion, regret, distraction, 
etc. There is an infinite number of realities which are not 


only objects of judgment, but which are experienced, 
opposed, feared, etc., by the human being and which in their 
inner structure are inhabited by negation, as by a nec- 
essary condition of their existence. We shall call them 


Jiegatites.'^^ Kant caught a glimpse of their significance when 
be spoke of regulative concepts (c.g. the immortality of the 
soul), types of syntheses of negative and positive in which 
negation is the condition of positivity. The function of nega- 
tion varies according to the nature of the object considered. 
Between wholly positive realities (which however retain ne- 
^tion as the condition of the sharpness of their outlines, as 
that which fixes them as what they are) and those in which 
the positivity is only an appearance concealing a hole of 
nothmgness, all gradations are possible. In any case it is im- 
possible to throw these negations back into an extra-mundane 

“Tr. A word coined by Sartre 17101 no equivalent term in English. 



56 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

nothingness since they are dispersed in being, are supported 
by being, and are conditions of reality. Nothingness beyond the 
world accounts for absolute negation; but we have just dis- 
covered a swarm of ultra-mundane beings which possess as 
much reality and efficacy as other beings, but which enclose 
within themselves non-being. They recjuire an explanation 
which remains within the limits of the real. Nothingness, if 
it is supported by being, vanishes qua nothingness, and we 
fall back upon being. Nothingness can be nihilated only on 
the foundation of being; if nothingness can be given, it^ is 
neither before nor after being, nor in a general way outside 
of being. Nothingness lies coiled in the heart of being— like a 
worm. 


V, THE ORIGIN OF NOTHINGNESS 

It would be well at this point to cast a glance backward and 
to measure the road already covered. We raised first the 
question of being. Then examining this very question con- 
ceived as a type of human conduct, we questioned this in 
turn. We next had to recognize that no question could be 
asked, in particular not that of being, if negation did not 
exist. But this negation itself when inspected more closely 
referred us back to Nothingness as its origin and foundation. 
In order for negation to exist in the world and in order that 
we may consequently raise questions concerning Being, it is 
necessary that in some way Nothingness be given. We per- 
ceived then that Nothingness can be conceived neither 
outside of being, nor as a complementary, abstract notion, 
nor as an infinite milieu where being is suspended. Nothing- 
ness must be given at the heart of Being, in order for us 
to be able to apprehend that particular type of. realities which 
we have called negatites. But this intra-mundane Nothingness 
can not be produced by Being-in-itself; the notion of Being 
as full positivity does not contain Nothingness as one of its 
structures. We can not even say that Being excludes it. Being 
lacks all relation with it. Hence the question which is put to 
us now with a particular urgency: if Nothingness can be 
conceived neither outside of Being, nor in terms of Being, and 

7 it is non-being, it can not derive 

trom .Itself the necessary force to "nihilate itself,” where 
does Nothingness come from? 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


57 


If we wish to pursue the problem further, we must first 
recognize that we can not grant to nothingness the property 
of “nihilatihg itself.” For although the expression “to nihilate 
itself” is thought of as removing from nothingness the last 
semblance of being, we must recognize that only Being can 
nihilate itself; however it comes about, in order to nihilate 
itself, it must be. But Nothingness is not. If we can speak 
of it, it is only because it possesses an appearance of being, 
a borrowed being, as we have noted above. Nothingness is 
not. Nothingness “is made-to-be,”^- Nothingness does not 
nihilate itself; Nothingness “is nihilated.” It follows there- 
fore that there must exist a Being (this can not be the In- 
itself) of which the property is to nihilate Nothingness, to 
support it in its being, to sustain it perpetually in its very 
existence, a being by which nothingness comes to things. But 
how can this Being be related to Nothingness so that through 
it Nothingness comes to things? We must observe first that 
the being postulated can not be passive in relation to 
Nothingness, can not receive it; Nothingness could not come 
to this being except through another Being — ^which would be 
an infinite regress. But on the other hand, the Being by which 
Nothingness comes to the world can not produce Nothing- 
ness while remaining indififerent to that production — like the 
Stoic cause which produces its effect without being itself 
changed. It would be inconceivable that a Being which is 
full positivity should maintain and create outside itself a 
Nothingness or transcendent being, for there would be noth- 
ing in Being by which Being could surpass itself toward Non- 
Being. The Being by which Nothingness arrives in the world 
must nihilate Nothingness in its Being, and even so it still 
runs the risk of establishing Nothingness as a transcendent in 
&e very heart of immanence unless it nihilates Nothingness 
in its being in connection with its own being. The Being by 
which Nothingness arrives in the world is a being such that 
m its Being, the Nothingness of its Being is in question. 
The being by which Nothingness comes to the world must be 

The French is est Sti, which literally means “is been,” an expres- 
sion as meaningless in ordinary French as in English. Maurice Natanson 
snggests “is-was.” (A Critique of Jean-Foul Sartre’s Ontology. University 
o Nebraska Studies. March 1951. p. 59.) I prefer “is made-to-be” because 
artre seems to be using elre as a transitive verb, here in the passive voice, 
m suggesting that nothingness has been subjected to an act involving 
Other passages containing this expression will, I believe, bear out 
wjs interpretation. 



BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


its own Nothingness. By this we must understand not a 
nihilating act, which would require in turn a foundation in 
Being, but an ontological characteristic of the Being required. 
It remains to learn in what delicate, exquisite region of Being 
we shall encounter that Being which is its own Nothingness. 

We shall be helped in our inquiry by a more complete 
examination of the conduct which served us as a point of 
departure. We must return to the question. We have seen, it 
may be recalled, that every question in essence posits the 
possibility of a negative reply. In a question we question a 
being about its being or its way of being. This way of 
being or this being is veiled; there always remains the possi- 
bility that it may unveil itself as a Nothingness, But from the 
very fact that we presume that an Existent can always be re- 
vealed as nothing, every question supposes that we realize a 
nihilating withdrawal in relation to the given, which becomes 
a simple presentation, fluctuating between being and Nothing- 
ness. 


It is essential therefore that the questioner have the 
permanent possibility of dissociating himself from the causal 
series which constitutes being and which can produce only 
being. If we admitted that the question is determined in the 
questioner by universal determinism, the question would 
thereby become unintelligible and even inconceivable. A real 
cause, in fact, produces a real effect and the caused being is 
wholly engaged by the cause in positivity; to the extent that 
its being depends on the cause, it can not have within itself 
the tiniest germ of nothingness. Thus in so far as the ques- 
tioner must be able to effect in relation to the questioned a 
kind of nihilating withdrawal, he is not subject to the 
causal order of the world; he detaches himself from Being. 
This means that by a double movement of nihilation he nihi- 
lates the thing questioned in relation to himself by placing it 
in a neutral^ state, between being and non-being — and that he 
nihilates himself in relation to the thing questioned by 
WOTching himself from being in order to be able to bring out 
of himself the possibility of a non-being! Thus in posing a 
question a certain negative element is introduced into the 
world. We see nothingness making the world iridescent, 
casting a shimmer over things. But at the same time the ques- 
tion emanates from a questioner who, in order to motivate 

se^Som questions, disengages him- 

rom being. This disengagement is then by definition a 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


59 


human process. Man presents himself at least in this instance 
as a being who causes Nothingness to arise in the world, inas- 
much as he himself is affected with non-being to this end. 

These remarks may serve as guiding thread as we examine 
the negatites of which we spoke earlier. There is no doubt at 
all that these are transcendent realities; distance, for example, 
is imposed on us as something which we have to take into 
account, which must be cleared with effort However these 
realities are of a very peculiar nature; they will indicate im- 
mediately an essential relation of human reality to the world. 
They derive their origin from an act, an expectation, or a 
project of the human being; they all indicate an aspect of 
being as it appears to the human being who is engaged in the 
world. The relations of man in the world, which the nigatites 
indicate, have nothing in common with the relations a 
posteriori which are brought out by empirical activity. We are 
no longer dealing with those relations of instrumentality by 
which, according to Heidegger, objects in the world disclose 
themselves to “human reality.” Every negatiti appears rather 
as one of the essential conations of this relation of instru- 
mentality. In order for the totality of being to order itself 
around us as instruments, in order for it to parcel itself into 
differentiated complexes which refer one to another and which 
can be used, it is necessary that negation rise up not as a thing 
among other things but as the rubric of a category which 
presides over the arrangement and the redistribution of great 
masses of being in things. Thus the rise of man in the midst 
of the being which “invests” him causes a world to be dis- 
covered. But the essential and primordial moment of this rise 
is the negation. Thus we have reached the first goal of this 
study. Man is the being through whom nothingness comes to 
the world. But this question imm ediately provokes another: 
What must man be in his being in order that through him 
nothingness may come to being? 

Being can generate only being and if man is inclosed in 
this process of generation, only being will come out of him. 

we are to assume that man is able to question this process — 
i-e., to make it the object of interrogation — he must be able 
to hold it up to view as a totality. He must be able to put 
himself outside of being and by the same stroke weaken the 
structure of the being of being. Yet it is not given to “human 
reality” to annihilate even provisionally the mass of being 
which it posits before itself. Man’s relation with being is that 



60 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

he can modify it. For man to put a particular existent out of 
circuit is to put himself out of circuit in relation to that 
existent. In this case he is not subject to it; he is out of reach; 
it can not act on him, for he has retired beyond a nothingness. 
Descartes following the Stoics has given a name to this popi- 
bility which human reality has to secrete a nothingness which 
isolates it — it is freedom. But freedom here is only a name. 

If we wish to penetrate further into the question, we must 
not be content with this reply and we ought to ask now, 
What is human freedom if through it nothingness comes into 
the world? 

It is not yet possible to deal with the problem of freedom 
in all its fullness.^® In fact the steps which we have completed 
up to now show elearly that freedom is not a faculty of the 
human soul to be envisaged and described in isolation. 
\^at we have been trying to define is the being of man in 
so far as he conditions the appearance of nothingness, and 
this being has appeared to us as freedom. Thus freedom as 
the requisite condition for the nihilation of nothingness is not 
a property which belongs among others to the essence of the 
human being. We have already noticed furthermore that 
with man the relation of existence to essence is not compa- 
rable to what it is for the things of the world. Human freedom 
precedes essence in man and makes it possible; the essence of 
the human being is suspended in his freedom. W’liat tve call 
freedom is impossible to distinguish from the being of,- 
“human reality.” Man does not exist first in order to be free ’ 
subsequently, there is no difference between the being of man 
and his being-free. This is not tlic time to make a frontal 
attack on a question which can be treated exhaustively only 
in the light of a rigorous elucidation of the human being. 
Here we are dealing with freedom in connection with tlje 
problem of nothingness and only to the extent that it condi- 
tions the appearance of nothingness. 

What first appears evident is that human reality can de- 
tach itself frotn the world — in questioning, in systematic 
doubt, in sceptical doubt, in the e7rox?Jt etc . — only if by 
nature it has the possibility of self-detachment. This W’as seen 
y Descartes, who is establishing doubt on freedom when he 
claims for us the possibility of suspending our judgments. 
Alam s position is similar. It is also in this sense that Hegel 

Cf, Part Four, Chapter one. 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


61 


asserts the freedom of the mind to the degree that mind is 
mediation — i.e., the Negative. Furthermore it is one of the 
trends of contemporary philosophy to see in human con- 
sciousness a sort of escape from the self; such is the meaning 
of the transcendence of Heidegger. The intentionality of 
Husserl and of Brentano has also to a large extent the charac- 
teristic of a detachment from self. But we are not yet in a 
position to consider freedom as an inner structure of con- 
sciousness. We lack for the moment both instruments and 
technique to permit us to succeed in that enterprise. What 
interests us at present is a temporal operation since questioning 
is, like doubt, a kind of behavior; it assumes that Ae human 
being reposes first in the depths of being and then detaches 
himself from it by a nihilating withdrawal. Thus we are en- 
visaging the condition of the nihil ation as a relation to the 
self in the heart of a temporal process. We wish simply to 
show that by identifying consciousness with a causal sequence 
indefinitely continued, one transmutes it into a plenitude of 
being and thereby causes it to return into the unlimited 
totality of being — as is well illustrated by the futility of the 
efforts to dissociate psychological determinism from universal 
determinism and to constitute it as a separate series. 

The room of someone absent, the books of which he 
turned the pages, the objects which he touched are in them- 
selves only books, objects, i.e., full actualities. The very traces 
which he has left can be deciphered as traces of him only 
within a situation where he has been already posited as absent. 
The dog-eared book with the well-read pages is not by itself 
a book of which Pierre has turned the pages, of which he 
no longer turns the pages. If we consider it as the present, 
transcendent -motivation of my perception or even as the 
^thetic flux, regulated by my sensible impressions, then it 
is merely a volume with turned down, worn pages; it can refer 
only to itself or to present objects, to the lamp which illumi- 
nates it, to the table which holds it It would be useless to 
invoke an association by contiguity as Plato does in the 
Phaedo, where he makes the image of the absent one appear 
on the margin of the perception of the lyre or of the cithara 
which he has touched. This image, if we consider it in itself 
and in the spirit of classical theories, is a definite plenitude; 
It IS a concrete and positive psychic fact Consequently we 
must of necessity pass on it a doubly negative judgment: 
subjectively, to signify that the image is not a perception; 



BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


objectively, to deny that the Pierre of whom I form the image 
is here at this moment. 

This is the famous problem of the characteristics of the 
true image, which has concerned so many psychologists from 
Taine to Spaier. Association, we see, does not solve the prob- 
lem; it pushes it back to the level of reflection. But in every 
way it demands a negation; that is, at the very least a nihilat- 
ing withdrawal of consciousness in relation to the irnage 
apprehended as subjective phenomenon, in order to posit it 
precisely as being only a subjective phenomenon. 

Now I have attempted to show elsewhere^® that if we 
posit the image first as a renascent perception, it is radically 
impossible to distinguish it subsequently from actual per- 
ceptions. The image must enclose in its very structure a nihilat- 
ing thesis. It constitutes itself qua image while positing its 
object as existing elsewhere or not existing. It carries within 
it a double negation; first it is the nihilation of the world 
(since the world is not offering the imagined object as an 
actual object of perception), secondly the nihilation of the 
object of the image (it is posited as not actual), and finally 
by the same stroke it is the nihilation of itself (since it is not 
a concrete, full psychic process). In explaining how I appre- 
hend the absence of Pierre in the room, it would be useless to 
invoke those famous “empty intentions” of Husserl, which 
are in great part constitutive of perception. Among the various 
perceptive intentions, indeed, there are relations of motiva- 
tion (but motivation is not causation), and among these 
intentions, some are full (f.e., filled with what they aim at) 
and others empty. But precisely because the matter which 
should fill the empty intentions does not exist, it can not be 
this which motivates them in their structure. And since the 
other intentions are full, neither can they motivate the empty 
intentions inasmuch as the latter are empty. Moreover these 
intentions are of psychic nature and it would be an error 
to envisage them in the mode of things; that is, as recipients 
which would first be given, which according to circum- 
stances could be emptied or filled, and which would be by 
nature indifferent to ^eir state of being empty or filled. It 
seems that Husserl has not always escaped the materialist 
lU^ion. To be empty an intention must be conscious of it- 
self as empty and precisely as empty of the exact matter at 


Paris: Alcan. 1936. Imagination: A Psychological Critique. 
Translated hy Forrest Williams. Univ of Michigan Pre.ss. 1962. 


I 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


63 


which it aims. An empty intention constitutes itself as empty 
to the exact extent that it posits its matter as. non-existing or 
absent. In short an empty intention is a consciousness of nega- 
tion which transcends itself toward an object which it posits 
as absent or non-existent. 

Thus whatever may be the explanation which we give of 
it, Pierre’s absence, in order to be established or realized, re- 
quires a negative moment 'by which consciousness, in the 
absence of all prior determination, constitutes itself as nega- 
tion. ff in terms of my perceptions of the room, I conceive 
of the former inhabitant who is no longer in the room, I am 
of necessity forced to produce an act of thought which no 
prior state can determine nor motivate, in short to effect in 
myself a break with being. And in so far as I continually use 
nigatites to isolate and determine existents — i.e., to think them 
— ^the succession of my “states of consciousness” is a perpetual 
separation of effect from cause, since every nihilating process 
must derive its source only from itself. Inasmuch as my pres- 
ent state would be a prolongation of my prior state, every 
opening by which negation could slip through would be com- 
pletely blocked. Every psychic process of nihilation implies 
then a cleavage between the immediate psychic past and the 
present. This cleavage is precisely nothingness. At least, some- 
one will say, there remains the possibility of successive implica- 
tion between the nihilating processes. My establishment of 
Pierre’s absence could still be determinant for my regret at 
not seeing Mm; you have not excluded the possibility of a 
determinism of nihilations. But aside from the fact that the 
original nihilation of the series must necessarily be dis- 
connected from the prior positive processes, what can be the 
meaning of a motivation of nothingness by nothingness? A 
being indeed can nihilate itself perpetually, but to the extent 
diat it nihilates itself, it foregoes being the origin of another 
phenomenon, even of a second niMlation. 

It remains to explain what this separation is, tMs disen- 
gaging of consciousness wMch conditions every negation. If 
we consider the prior consciousness envisaged as motivation 
We see suddenly and evidently that nothing has just slipped 
m between that state and the present state. There has been no 
break in continuity within the flux of the temporal develop- 
naent, for that would force us to return to th'' inadmissible 
concept of the infinite divisibility of time and of the temporal 
point nr instant as the limit of the division Neither has there 



64 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

been an abrupt interpolation of an opaque element to separate 
prior from subsequent in the way that a knife blade cuts a 
piece of fruit in two. Nor is there a weakening of the motiva- 
ting force of the prior consciousnesss; it remains what it is, it 
does not lose anything of its urgency. What separates prior 
from subsequent is exactly nothing. This nothing is absolutely 
impassable, just because it is nothing; for m every obstacle 
to be cleared there is something positive which gives itself as 
about to be cleared. The prior consciousness is always there 
(though with the modification of “pastness”). It constantly 
maintains a relation of interpretation with the present con- 
sciousness, but on the basis of this existential relation it is 
put out of the game, out of the circuit, between parentheses 
—exactly as in the eyes of one practicing the phenomenologi- 
cal eirox^ 3 the world both is within him and outside of him. 

Thus the condition on which human reality can deny all or 
part of the world is that human reality carry nothingness 
within itself as the nothing vAmAs. separates its present from 
all its past. But this is still not aU, for the nothing en- 
visaged would not yet have the sense of nothingness; a sus- 
pension of being which would remain unnamed, which would 
not be consciousness of suspending being would come from 
outside consciousness and by reintroducing opacity into the 
heart of this absolute lucidity, would have the effect of cutting 
it in two.^’^ Furthermore this nothing would by no means be 
negative. Nothingness, as we have seen above, is the ground 
of the negation because it conceals the negation within itself,' 
becaiKe it is the negation as being. It is necessary then that 
conscious being constitute itself in relation to its past as sep- 
arated from this past by a nothingness. It must necessarily be 
conscious of this cleavage in being, but not as a phenomenon 
which it experiences, rather as a structure of consciousness 
which it is. Freedom is the human being putting his past out 
of play by secreting his own nothingness. Let us imderstand 
indeed that this original necessity of being its own nothing- 
ness does not belong to consciousness intermittently and on 
fee occasion of particular negations. This does not happen 
just at a particular moment in psychic life when negative or 
mterrogative attitudes appear; consciousness continually ex- 
penences itself as the mihilation of its past being. 

But someone doubtless will believe that he can , use against 
us here an objection which we have frequently raised our- 

” See Introduction, Section IH. 


THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


65 


selves; if the nihilating consciousness exists only as con- 
sciousness of nihilatiqn, we ought to be able to define and 
describe a constant mode of consciousness, present qua con- 
sciousness, which would be consciousness of nihilation. Does 
this consciousness exist? Behold, a new question has been 
raised here: if freedom is the being of consciousness, con- 
sciousness ought to exist as consciousness of freedom. What 
form does this consciousness of freedom assume? In freedom 
the human being is his own past (as also his own future) in 
the form of nihilation. If our analysis has not led us astray, 
there ought to exist for the human being, in so far as he is 
conscious of being, a certain mode of standing opposite his 
past and his future, as being both this past and this future and 
as not being them. We shall be able to furnish an immediate 
reply to this question; it is in anguish that man gets the con- 
sciousness of his freedom, or if you prefer, anguish is the 
mode of being of freedom as consciousness of being; it is in 
anguish that freedom is, in its being, in question for itself. 

BCierkegaard describing anguish in the face of what one 
lacks characterizes it as anguish in the face of freedom. But 
Heidegger, whom we know to have been greatly influenced 
by Kierkegaard,^® considers anguish instead as the appre- 
hension of nothingness. These two descriptions of anguish do 
not appear to us contradictory; on the contrary the one 
implies the other. 

First we must acknowledge that Kierkegaard is right; 
anguish is distinguished from fear in that fear is fear of 
beings in the world whereas anguish is anguish before myself. 
Vertigo is anguish to the extent that I am afraid not of falling 
over the precipice, but of throwing myself over. A situation 
provokes fear if there is a possibility of my life being 
changed from without; my being provokes anguish to the 
extent that I distrust myself and my own reactions in that 
situation. The artillery preparation which precedes the attack 
can provoke fear in &e soldier who undergoes the bombard- 
ment, but anguish is bom in him when he tries to foresee the 
conduct with which he will face the bombardment, when 
he asks himself if he is going to be able to “hold up.” Sim- 
ilarly the recruit who reports for active duty at the beginning 
of the war can in some instances be afraid of death, but 
more often he is “afraid of being afraid"; that is, he is filled 
^Ih anguish before himself. Most of the time dangerous 

Wahl: Etudes Kierkegaardiennes, Kierkegaard et Heidegger. 



66 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

or threatening situations present themselves in facets; they 
will be apprehended through a feeling of fear or of anguish 
according to whether we envisage the situation as acting on 
the man or the man as acting on the situation. The man who 
has just received a hard blow — ^for example, losing a great 
part of -his wealth in a crash — can have the fear of threatening 
poverty. He will experience anguish a moment later when 
nervously wringing his hands (a symbolic reaction to the 
action which is imposed but which remains still wholly un- 
determined), he exclaims to himself: “What am I going to 
do? But what am I going to do?” In this sense fear and an- 
guish are exclusive of one another since fear is unreflective 
apprehension of the transcendent and anguish is reflective 
apprehension of the self; the one is bom in the destruction 
of the other. The normal process in the case which I have just 
cited is a constant transition from the one to the other. But 
there exist also situations where anguish appears pure; that is, 
without ever being preceded or followed by fear. If, for ex- 
ample, I have been raised to a new dignity and charged with a 
delicate and flattering mission, I can feel anguish at the 
thought that I will not be capable perhaps of fulfilling it, 
and yet I will not have the least fear in the world of the 
consequences of my possible failure. 

What is the meaning of anguish in the various examples 
which I have just given? Let us take up again the ex- 
ample of vertigo. Vertigo announces itself through fear; 
I am on a narrow path — without a guard rail — which goes 
along a precipice. The precipice presents itself to me as to be 
avoided; it represents a danger of death. At the same time I 
conceive of a certain number of causes, originating in 
universal determinism, which can transform that threat of 
death into reality; I can slip on a stone and fall into the 
abyss; the crumbling earth of the path can give way under my 
steps. Through these various anticipations, I am given to my- 
self as a thing; I am passive in relation to these possibilities; 
they come to me from without; in so far as I am also an object 
m the world, subject to gravitation, they are my possibilities. 
At ^is moment f ear appears, which in terms of the situation 
IS the apprehension of myself as a destructible transcendent 
m the midst of transcendents, as an object which does 
not contain in itself the origin of its future disappearance. 
My reaction will be of the reflective order; I will pay at- 
tention to the stones in the road; I will keep myself as far 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


67 


as possible from the edge of the path. I realize myself as 
pushing away the threatening situation with all my strength, 
and I project before myself a certain number of foture con- 
ducts destined to keep the threats of the world at a distance 
from me. These conducts are my possibilities. I escape fear 
by the very fact that I am placing myself on a plane where 
my own possibilities are substituted for the transcendent 
probabilities where human action had no place. 

But these conducts, precisely because they are my possi- 
bilities, do not appear to me as determined by foreign causes. 
Not only is it not strictly certain that they will be effective; in 
particular it is not strictly certain that they will be adopted, 
for they do not have existence sufficient in itself. We could 
say, varying the expression of Berkeley, that their “being is 
a sustained-being” and that their “possibility of being is only 
an ought-to-be-sustained. Due to this fact their possibility 
has as a necessary condition the possibility of negative conduct 
{not to pay attention to the stones in the road, to run, to think 
of something else) and the possibility of the opposite conduct 
(to throw myself over the precipice) . The possibility which’ I 
make my concrete possibility can appear as my possibility only 
by raising itself on the basis of the totality of the logical 
possibilities which the situation allows. But these rejected 
possibilities in turn have no other being than their “sustained- 
being”; it is I who sustain them in being, and inversely their 
present non-being is an "ought-not-to-be-sustained.” No ex- 
ternal cause will remove them. I alone am the permanent 
source of their non-being, I engage myself in them; in order 
to cause my possibility to appear, I posit the other possibilities 
so as to nihilate them. This would not produce anguish if 
I could apprehend myself in my relations with these possibles 
as a cause producing its effects. In this case the effect defined 
as niy possibility would be strictly determined. But then it 
would cease to be possible; it would become simply 
“about-to-happen.” If &en I wished to avoid anguish and 
vertigo, it would be enough if I were to consider the 
motives (instinct of self-preservation, prior fear, etc.), which 
m^e me reject the situation envisaged, as determining my 
pnor activity in the same way that the presence at a deter- 
mined point of one given mass determines the courses 
followed by other masses; it would be necessary, in other 
words, that I apprehend in myself a strict psychological de- 

We shall return to possibilities in the second part of this work. 



68 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

terminism. But I am in anguish precisely because any conduct 
on my part is only possible, and this means that whhe consti- 
tuting a totality of motives for pushing away that situation, I 
at the same moment apprehend these motives as not suffi- 
ciently effective. At the very moment when I apprehend my 
being as horror of the precipice, I am conscious of that horror 
as not determinant in relation to my possible conduct. In one 
sense that horror calls for prudent conduct, and it is in itself 
a pre-outline of that conduct; in another sense, it posits the 
final developments of that conduct only as possible, precisely 
because I do not apprehend it as the cause of these final de- 
velopments but as need, appeal, etc. 

Now as we have seen, consciousness of being is the being 
of consciousness. There is no question here of a contemplation 
which I could make after the event, of a horror already 
constituted; it is the very being of horror to appear to itself 
as “not being the cause” of the conduct it calls for. In short, 
to avoid fear, which reveals to me a transcendent future 
strictly determined, I take refuge in reflection, but the latter 
has only an undetermined future to offer. This means that 
in establishing a certain conduct as a possibility and precisely 
because it is my possibility, I am aware that nothing can com- 
pel me to adopt that conduct. Yet I am indeed already there 
in the future; it is for the sake of that being which I will be 
there at the turning of the path that I now exert all my 
strength, and in this sense there is already a relation between 
my future being and my present being. But a nothingness has 
slipped into the heart of this relation; I am not the self which 
I will be. First I am not that self because time separates me 
from it. Secondly, I am not that self because what I am is not 
the foundation of what I will be. Finally I am not that self 
because no actual existent can determine strictly what I am 
going to be. Yet as I am already what I will be (otherwise I 
would not be interested in any one being more than another) , 
I am the self which 1 will be, in the mode of not being it. 
It is through my horror that I am carried toward the future, 
and the horror nihilates itself in that it constitutes the future 
as possible, .^guish is precisely my consciousness of being my 
own future, in the mode of not-being. To be exact, the nihila- 
tion of horror as a motive, which has the effect of reinforcing 
horror as a state, has as its positive counterpart the appearance 
of other forms of conduct (in particular that which consists 
in throwing myself over the precipice) as my possible possi- 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


69 


bilities. If nothing compels me to save my life, nothing pre- 
vents me from precipitating myself into the abyss. The de- 
cisive conduct will emanate from a self which I am not yet 
Thus the self which I am depends on the self which I am not 
yet to the exact extent that the self which I am not yet 
does not depend on the self which I am. Vertigo appears 
as the apprehension of this dependence. I approach the prec- 
ipice, and my scrutiny is searching for myself in my very 
depths. In terms of th^ moment, I play with my possibilities. 
My eyes, running over the abyss from top to bottom, imitate 
the possible fall and realize it symbolically; at the same time 
suicide, from the fact that it becomes a possibility possible 
for me, now causes to appear possible motives for adopting it 
(suicide would cause anguish to cease) . Fortunately these mo- 
tives in their turn, from the sole fact that they are motives of 
a possibility, present themselves as ineffective, as non-deter- 
minant; they can no more produce the suicide than my horror 
of the fall can determine me to avoid it. It is this counter- 
anguish which generally puts an end to anguish by trans- 
muting it into indecision. Indecision in its turn calls for de- 
cision. I abruptly put myself at a distance from the edge of 
the precipice and resume my way. 

The example which we have just analyzed has shown 
us what we could call “anguish in the face of the future.” 
There exists another: anguish in the face of the past. It is 
that of the gambler who has freely and sincerely decided not 
to gamble anymore and who, when he approaches the 
gaming table, suddenly sees all his resolutions melt away. This 
phenomenon has often been described as if the sight of the 
gaming table reawakened in us a tendency which entered into 
conflict with our former resolution and ended by drawing us 
in spite ~^of this. Aside from the fact that such a description 
is done in materialistic terms and peoples the mind with 
opposing forces (there is, for example, the moralists’ famous 
‘struggle of reason with the passions”), it does not account 
for the facts. In reality — ^the letters of Dostoevsky bear wit- 
ness to this — ^there is nothing in us which resembles an inner 
debate as if we had to weigh motives and incentives before 
deciding. The earlier resolution of “not playing anymore” 
IS always there, and in the majority of cases the gambler when 
ui the presence of the gaming table, turns toward it as if to 

V P^^y> or rather having 

taken his resolution the day before, he thinks of himself stUl 



70 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

as not wishing to play anymore; he believes in the effectiveness 
of this resolution. But what he apprehends then in an^sh is 
precisely the total inefficacy of the past resolution. It is there 
doubtless but fixed, ineffectual, surpassed by the very fact that 
I am conscious of it. The resolution is still me to the extent 
that I realize constantly my identity with myself across the 
temporal fliix, but it is no longer me — due to the fact that it 
has become an object for my consciousness. I am not subject 
to it, it fails in the mission which I have given it. The resolu- 
tion is there still, I am it in the mode of not-being. What the 
gambler apprehends at this instant is again the permanent rup- 
ture in determinism; it is nothingness which separates him 
from himself; I should have liked so much not to gamble 
anymore; yesterday I even had a synthetic apprehension of the 
situation (threatening ruin, disappointment of my relatives) 
as forbidding me to play. It seemed to me that I had estab- 
lished a real barrier between gambling and myself, and now 
I suddenly perceive that my former understanding of the situ- 
ation is no more than a memory of an idea, a memory of a 
feeling. In order for it to come to my aid once more, I must 
remake it ex nihilo and freely. The not-gambling is only one 
of my possibilities, as the fact of gambling is another of them, 
neither more nor less. / must rediscover the fear of financial 
ruin or of disappointing my family, etc., I must re-create it as 
experienced fear. It stands behind me like a boneless phantom. 
It depends on me alone to lend it flesh. I am alone and naked 
before temptation as I was the day before. After having pa- 
tiently built up barriers and walls, after enclosing myself in 
the magic circle of a resolution, I perceive with anguish that 
nothing prevents me from gambling. The anguish is me since 
by the very fact of taking my position in existence as con- 
sciousness of being, I make myself not to be the past of good 
resolutions which I am. 

It would be in vain to object that the sole condition of this 
anguish is ignorance of the underlying psychological deter- 
minism. According to such a view my anxiety would corrie 
frorn lack of knowing the real and effective incentives which 
m the darkness of the unconscious determine nty action, 
in reply we shall point out first that anguish has not 
appeared to us as a proof of human freedom; the latter was 
^yen to us as the necessary condition for the question. We 
r f- show that there exists a specific consciousness 

ee om, and we wished to show that this consciousness is 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


71 


anguish. This means that we wished to establish anguish 
in its essential structure as consciousness of freedom. Now 
from this point of view the. existence of a psychological de- 
terminism could not invalidate the results of our description. 
Indeed anguish either is actually an unrealized ignorance of 
this determinism — and then anguish apprehends itself in 
fact as freedom — or else one may claim that anguish is con- 
sciousness of being ignorant of the real causes of our acts. 
In the latter case anguish would come from that of which we 
have a presentiment, a screen deep within ourselves for mon- 
strous motives which would suddenly release guilty acts. But 
in this case we should suddenly appear to ourselves as things 
in the world; we should be to ourselves or own transcendent 
situation. Then anguish would disappear to give way to fear, 
for fear is a synthetic apprehension of the transcendent as 
dreadful. 

This freedom which reveals itself to us in anguish can be 
characterized by the existence of that nothing which insin- 
uates itself between motives and act. It is not because I am 
free that my act is not subject to the determination of mo- 
tives; on the contrary, the structure of motives as ineffective 
is the condition .of my freedom. If someone asks what this 
nothing is which provides a foundation for freedom, we shall 
reply that we can not describe it since it is not, but we can 


at least hint at its meaning by saying that this nothing is 
made-to-be by the human being in his relation with himself. 
The nothing here corresponds to the necessity for the motive 
to appear as motive only as a correlate of a consciousness of 
motive. In short, as soon as we abandon the hypothesis of the 
contents of consciousness, we must recognize that there is 
never a motive in consciousness; motives are only for con- 


sciousness. And due to the very fact that the motive can 
arise only as appearance, it constitutes itself as ineffective. 
Of course it does not have the externality of a temporal-spatial 
“ing; it always belongs to subjectivity and it is apprehended 
as mine. But it is by nature transcendence in immanence, 
and consciousness is not subject to it because of the very 
fact that consciousness posits it; for consciousness has now 
me task of conferring on the motive its meaning and its im- 
portance, Thus the nothing which separates the motive from 
consciousness characterizes itself as transcendence in im- 


If is by arising as immanence that consciousness 
mmlates the nothing which makes consciousness exist for it- 


r 



72 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

self as transcendence. But we see that the nothingness which 
is the condition of all transcendent negation can be elucidated 
only in terms of two other original nihilations: (1) Con- 
sciousness is not its own motive inasmuch as it is empty of 
all content. This refers us to a nihilating structure of the 
pre-reflective cogito. (2) Consciousness confronts its past and 
its future as facing a self which it is in the mode of not- 
being. This refers us to a nihilating structure of temporality. 

There can be for us as yet no question of elucidating 
these two types of nihilation; we do not at the moment have 
the necessary techniques at our disposal. It is sufficient to 
observe here that the definitive explanation of negation can 
not be given without a description of self-consciousness and 
of temporality. 

What we should note at present is that freedom, which 
manifests itself through anguish, is characterized by a con- 
stantly renewed obligation to remake the Self which designates 
the free being. As a matter of fact when we showed earlier 
that my possibilities were filled with anguish because it 
depended on me alone to sustain them in their existence, that 
did not mean that they derived from a Me which, ,to itself at 
least, would first be given and would then pass in the temporal 
flux from one consciousness to another consciousness. The 


gambler who must realize anew the synthetic apperception 
, of a situation which would forbid him to play, must rediscover 
at the same time the self which can appreciate that situation, 
which ‘ is in situation.” Tliis self with its a priori and historical 
content is the essence of man. Anguish as the manifestation of 
freedom in the face of self means that man is always separated 
by a nothingness from his essence. We should refer here to 
Hegel s statement: *‘Wesen ist was gewesen ist" Essence is 
what has been. Essence is everything in the human being 
which we can indicate by the words — that is. Due to this 
met it is the totality of characteristics which explain the act. 

ut the act is always beyond that essence; it is a human act 
on y m so far as it surpasses every explanation which we can 
give of It, precisely because the very application of the for- 
mula that is” to man causes ail that is designated, to have- 
an continually carries with him a pre-judicative com- 
hjs essence, but due to this very fact he is 
rpniit ^ “^thingness. Essence is all that human 

^ /lavmg been. It is here that 

ppears as an apprehension of self inasmuch as it 


THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


73 


exists in the perpetual mode of detachment from what is; 
better yet, in so far as it makes itself exist as such. For we 
can never apprehend an Erlebnis as a living consequence of 
that nature which is ours. The overflow of our consciousness 
progressively constitutes that nature, but it remains always be- 
hind us and it dv/ells in us as the permanent object of our 
retrospective comprehension. It is in so far as this nature is 
a demand without being a recourse that it is apprehended 
in anguish. 

In anguish freedom is anguished before itself inasmuch as 
it is instigated and bound by nothing. Someone will say, 
freedom has just been defined as a permanent structure of the 
human being: if anguish manifests it, then anguish ought to 
be a permanent state of my affectivity. But, on the contrary, 
it is completely exceptional. How can we explain the rarity 
of the phenomenon of anguish? 

We must note first of aU that the most common situations 
of our life, those in which we apprehend our possibilities as 
such by means of actively realizing them, do not manifest 
themselves to us through anguish because their very structure 
excludes anguished apprehension. Anguish in fact is the rec- 
ognition of a possibility as my possibility; that is, it is con- 
stituted when consciousness sees itself cut from its essence by 
nothingness or separated from the futme by its very freedom. 
This means that a nihilating nothing removes from me all 
excuse and that at the same time what I project as my future 
being is always nihilated and reduced to the rank of simple 
possibility because the future which I am remains out of my 
reach. But we ought to remark that in these various 
instances we have to do with a temporal form where I await 
myself in the future, where I “make an appointment with 
myself on the other side of that hour, of that day, or of that 
month.” Anguish is the fear of not finding myself at that ap- 
pointment, of no longer even wishing to bring myself there. 
But I can also find myself engaged in acts which reveal my 
possibilities to me at the very instant when they are realized, 
in lighting this cigarette I learn my concrete possibility, or if 
you prefer, my desire of smoking. It is by the very act of 
drawing’ toward me this paper and this pen that I give to my- 
self as my most immediate possibility the act of working at 
this book; there I am engaged, and I discover it at the very 
moment v/hen I am already throwing myself into it. At that in- 
stant, to be sure, it remains my possibility, since I can at each 



74 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

instant turn myself away from my work, push away the note- 
book, put the cap on my fountain pen. But this possibility of 
interrupting the action is rejected on a second level by the 
fact that the action which discovers itself to me through my 
act tends to crystallize as a transcendent, relatively independent 
form. The consciousness of man in action is non-reflective 
consciousness. It is consciousness of something, and the tran- 
scendent which discloses itself to this consciousness is of a 
particular nature; it is a structure of exigency in the world, 
and the world correlatively discloses in it complex relations of 
instrumentality. In the act of tracing the letters which I aui 
writing, the whole sentence, still unachieved, is revealed as a 
passive exigency to be written. It is the very meaning of the 
letters which I form, and its appeal is not put into question, 
precisely because I can not write the words without transcend- 
ing them toward the sentence and because I discover it as the 
necessary condition for the meaning of the words which I am 
writing. At the same time in the very framework of the act an 
indicative complex of instruments reveals itself and organizes 
itself (pen-ink-paper-lines-raargin, etc.), a complex which can 
not be apprehended for itself but which rises in the heart of 
the transcendence which discloses to me as a passive exigency 
the sentence to be written. Thus in the quasi-generality of 
everyday acts, I am engaged, I have ventured, and I discover 
my possibilities by realizing them and in the very act of realiz- 
ing them as exigencies, urgencies, instrumentalities. 

^ Of course m eve^ act of this kind, there remains the possi- 
bility of putting this act into question — in so far as it refers 
to more distant, more essential ends — as to its ultimate 
meanings and my essential possibilities. For example, the 
sentence which I write is the meaning of the letters which 
I trace, but the whole work which I wish to produce is the 
meaning of the sentence. And this work is a possibility in 
connection with which I can feel anguish; it is truly my possi- 
bility, and I do not know whether I will continue it tomor- 
row;^ torriorrow in relation to it my freedom can exercise 
its nihilating power. But that anguish implies the apprehension 
of the work as such as my possibility. I must place myself 
directly opposite it and realize my relation to it. This means 
at I ought not only to raise with reference to it objective 
^estions such as, “Is it necessary to write this work?” for 
these quejions refer me simply to wider objective significa- 
tions, such as, “Is it opportune to write it at this moment? 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


75 


Isn’t this just a repetition of another such book? Is its material 
of sufficient interest? Has it been sufficiently thought through?” 
etc. — all significations which remain transcendent and give 
themselves as a multitude of exigencies in the world. 

In order for my freedom to be anguished in connection 
with the book which I am writing, this book must appear in 
its relation with me. On the one hand, I must discover my 
essence as what I have been — have been “wanting to write 
this book,” I have conceived it, I have believed that it would 
be interesting to write it, and I have constituted myself in 
such a way that it is not possible to understand me without 
taking into account the fact that this book has been my essen- 
tial possibility. On the other hand, I must discover the 
nothhigness which separates my freedom from this essence: 
/ have been “wanting to write,” but nothing, not even what 
I have been, can compel me to write it. Finally, I must dis- 
cover the nothingness which separates me from what I shall 
be: I discover that the permanent possibility of abandoning 
the book is the very condition of the possibility of writing it 
and the very meaning of my freedom. It is necessary that in 
the very constitution of the book as my possibility, I appre- 
hend my freedom as being the possible destroyer in the pres- 
ent and in the future of what I am. That is, I must place 
myself on the plane of reflection. So long as I remain on the 
plane of action, the book to be written is only the distant and 
presupposed meaning of the act which reveals my possibilities 
to me. The book is only the implication of the action; it is 
not made an object and posited for itself; it does not “raise 
the question”; it is conceived neither as necessary nor contin- 
gent. It is onl}^ the permanent, remote meaning in terms of 
which I can understand what I am writing in the present, 
and hence, it is conceived as being; that is, only by positing 
the book as the existing basis on which my present, existing 
sentence emerges, can I confer a determined meaning upon 
my sentence. 

Now at each instant we are thrust into the world and en- 
gaged there. This means that we act before positing our possi- 
bilities and that these possibilities which are disclosed as 
realized or in process of being realized refer to meanings 
^ich necessitate special acts in order to be put into question. 
Ine alann which rings in the morning refers to the possibility 
of my going to work, which is my possibility. But to appre- 
end the summons of the alarm as a summons is to get up. 


76 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

Therefore the very act of getting up is reassuring, for it eludes 
the question, “Is work my possibility?” Consequently it does 
not put me in a position to apprehend the possibility of 
quietism, of refusing to work, and finally the possibility of 
refusing the world and the possibility of death. In short, to 
the extent that I apprehend the meaning of the ringing, I am 
already up at its summons; this apprehension guarantees me 
against the anguished intuition that it is I who confer on the 
alarm clock its exigency — 1 and I alone. 

In the same way, what we might call everyday morality is 
exclusive of ethical anguish. There is ethical anguish when I 
consider myself in my original relation to values. Values in 
actuality are demands which lay claim to a foundation. But 
this foundation can in no way be being, for every value which 
would base its ideal nature on its being would thereby cease 
even to be a value and would realize the heteronomy of my 
will. Value derives its being from its exigency and not its 
exigency from its being. It does not deliver itself to a contem- 
plative intuition which would apprehend it as being value 
and thereby would remove from it its right over my freedom. 
On the contrary, it can be revealed only to an active freedom 
which makes it exist as value by the sole fact of recognizing it 
as such. It follows that my freedom is the unique foundation 
of values and that nothing, absolutely nothing, justifies me in 
adopting this or that particular value, this or that particular 
scale of values. As a being by whom values exist, I am un- 
justifiable. My freedom is anguished at being the founda- 
tion of values while itself without foundation. It is anguished 
in addition because values, due to the fact that they are essen- 
tially revealed to a freedom, can not disclose themselves 
without being at the same time “put into question,” for the 
posssibility of overturning the scale of values appears com- 
plementarily as my possibility. It is anguish before values 
which is the recognition of the ideality of values. 

Ordinarily, however, my attitude with respect to values is . 
eminently reassuring. In fact I am engaged- in a world of 
values. The anguished apperception of values as sustained in 
being my freedom is a secondary and mediated phenome- 
non. The immediate is the world with its urgency; and in this 
world where I engage myself, my acts cause values to spring 
up like partridges. My indignation has given to me the nega- 
ive value baseness,’ my admiration has given the positive 
va ue grandeur. Above all my obedience to a multitude of 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


77 


tabus, which is real, reveals these tabus to me as existing in 
fact. The bourgeois who call themselves “respectable citizens” 
do not become respectable as the result of contemplating 
moral values. Rather from the moment of their arising in the 
world they are thrown into a pattern of behavior the meaning 
of which is respectability. Thus respectability acquires a being; 
it is not put into question. Values are sown on my path 
as thousands of little real demands, like the signs which order 
us to keep off the grass. 

Thus in what we shall call the world of the immediate, 
which delivers itself to our unreflective consciousness, we do 
not first appear to ourselves, to be thrown subsequently into 
enterprises. Our being is immediately “in situation”; that is, 
it arises in enterprises and knows itself first in so far as it is 
reflected in those enterprises. We discover ourselves then in a 
world peopled with demands, in the heart of projects “in the 
course of realization.” I write. I am going to smoke. I have 
an appointment this evening with Pierre. I must not forget 
to reply to Simon. I do not have the right to conceal the truth 
any longer from Claude. All these trivial passive expectations 
of the real, all these commonplace, everyday values, derive 
their meaning from an original projection of myself which 
stands as my choice of myself in the world. But to be exact, 
this projection of myself toward an original possibility, which 
causes the existence of values, appeals, expectations, and in 
general a world, appears to me only beyond the world as the 
meaning and the abstract, logical signification of my enter- 
prises. For the rest, there exist concretely alarm clocks, sign- 
boards, tax forms, policemen, so many guard rails against 
anguish. But as soon as the enterprise is held at a distance 
from me, as soon as I am referred to myself because I must 
await myself in the future, then I discover myself suddenly 
as the one who gives its meaning to the alarm clock, the one 
who by a signboard forbids himself to walk on a flower bed 
or on the lawn, the one from whom the boss’s order borrows 
its urgency, the one who decides the interest of the book 
wluch he is writing, the one finally who makes the values 
exist in order to determine his action by their demands. I 
emerge alone and in anguish confronting the unique and 
original project which constitutes my being; all the barriers, 
all the guard rails collapse, nihilated by the consciousness of 
Diy freedom. I do not have nor can I have recourse to any 
value against the fact that it is I who sustain values in being. 



78 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

Nothing can ensure me against myself, cut off from the world 
and from my essence by this nothingness which I am. 1 have 
to realize the meaning of the world and of my essence; I 
make my decision concerning them — ^without justification 
and without excuse. 

Anguish then is the reflective apprehension of freedom by 
itself. In this sense it is mediation, for although it is immedi- 
ate consciousness of itself, it arises from the negation of the 
appeals of the world. It appears at the moment that I disen- 
gage myself from the world where I had been engaged — in 
order to apprehend myself as a consciousness which possesses 
a pre-ontological comprehension of its essence and a pre- 
judicative sense of its possibilities. Anguish is opposed to the 
mind of the serious man who apprehends values in terms of 
the world and who resides in the reassuring, materialistic 
substantiation of values. In the serious mood I define myself 
in terms of the object by pushing aside a priori as impossible 
all enterprises in which I am not engaged at the moment; 
the meaning which my freedom has given to the world, I ap- 
prehend as coming from the world and constituting my ob- 
ligations. In anguish I apprehend myself at once as totally free 
and as not being able to derive the meaning of the world ex- 
cept as coming from myself. 

We should not however conclude that being brought on 
to the reflective plane and envisaging one’s distant or imme- 
diate possibilities suffice to apprehend oneself in pure an- 
guish. In each instance of reflection anguish is bom as a 
structure of the reflective consciousness in so far as the latter 
considers consciousness as an object of reflection; but it still 
remains possible for me to maintain various types of conduct 
with respect to my own anguish — ^in particular, patterns of 
flight. Everything takes place, in fact, as if our essential and 
immediate behavior with respect to anguish is flight. Psycho- 
logical determinism, before being a theoretical conception, is 
first an attitude of excuse, or if you prefer, the basis of all 
attitudes of excuse. It is reflective conduct with respect to 
anguish; it asserts that there are within us antagonistic forces 
whose type of existence is comparable to that of things. It 
attempts to fill the void which encircles us, to re-establish the 
links between past and present, between present and future. 
It provides us with a nature productive of our acts, and these 
very acts it makes transcendent; it assigns to them a founda- 
tion m something other than themselves by endowing them 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


79 


with an inertia and externality eminently reassuring because 
they constitute a permanent game of excuses. Psychological 
determinism denies that transcendence of human reality 
which makes it emerge in anguish beyond its own essence. At 
the same time by reducing us to never being anything but 
what we are, it reintroduces in us the absolute positivity of 
being-in-itself and thereby reinstates us at the heart of 
being. 

But this determinism, a reflective defense against anguish, 
is not given as a reflective intuition. It avails nothing against 
the evidence of freedom; hence it is given as a faith to take 
refuge in, as the ideal end toward which we can flee to escape 
anguish. That is made evident on the philosophical plane by 
the fact that deterministic psychologists do not claim to 
found their thesis on the pure givens of introspection. They 
present it as a satisfying hypothesis, the value of which comes 
from the fact that it accounts for the facts — or as a necessary 
postulate for establishing all psychology. They admit the ex- 
istence of an immediate consciousness of freedom, which their 
opponents hold up against them under the name of “proof 
by intuition of the inner sense.” They merely focus the debate 
on the value of this inner revelation. Thus the intuition 
which causes us to apprehend ourselves as the original cause 
of our states and our acts has been discussed by nobody. It is 
within the reach of each of us to try to mediate an- 
guish by rising above it and by judging it as an fllusion due 
to the mistaken belief that we are the real causes of our acts. 
The problem which presents itself then is that of the degree 
of faith in this mediation. Is an anguish placed under judg- 
ment a disarmed anguish? Evidently not. However here a new 
phenomenon is bom, a process of “distraction” in relation to 
anguish which, once again, supposes within it a nihilating 
power. 

By itself determinism would not sufiice to establish dis- 
traction since determinism is only a postulate or an hypothesis. 
This process of detachment is a more complete activity of 
flight which operates on the very level of reflection. It is first 
an attempt at distraction in relation to the possibles opposed 
to my possible. When I constitute myself as the compre- 
hension of a possible as my possible, I must recognize its ex- 
istence at the end of my project and apprehend it as myself, 
awaiting me down there in the future and separated from me 
by a nothingness. In this sense I apprehend myself as the 



80 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

original source of my possibility, and it is this which ordinar- 
ily we call the consciousness of freedom. It is this structure 
of consciousness and this alone that the proponents of free 
will have in mind when they speak of the intuition of the 
inner sense. But it happens that I force myself at the same 
time to be distracted from the constitution of other possibili- 
ties which contradict my possibility. In truth I can not avoid 
positing their existence by the same movement which gener- 
ates the chosen possibility as mine. I can not help constituting 
them as living possibilities; that is, as having the possibility 
of becoming my possibilities. But I force myself to see them 
as endowed with a transcendent, purely logical being, in 
short, as things. If on the reflective plane I envisage the 
possibility of writing this book as my possibility, then be- 
tween this possibility and my consciousness I cause a nothing- 
ness of being to arise which constitutes the writing of the book 
as a possibility and which I apprehend precisely in the per- 
manent possibility that the possibility of not writing the book 
is my possibility. But I attempt to place myself on the other 
side of the possibility of not writing it as I might do with 
respect to an observable object, and I let myself be pene- 
trated with what I wish to see there; I try to apprehend the 
possibility of not writing as needing to be mentioned merely 
as a reminder, as not concerning me. It must be an external 
possibility in relation to me, like movement in relation to the 
motionless billiard ball. If I could succeed in this, the possi- 
bilities hostile to my possibility would be constituted as logical 
entities and would lose their effectiveness. They would no 
longer be threatening since they would be “outsiders,” 
since they would surround my possible as purely conceivable 
eventualities; that is, fundamentally, conceivable by another 
or as possibles of another who might find himself in the same 
situation. They would belong to the objective situation as a 
transcendent structure, or if you prefer (to utilize Heidegger’s 
terminology) — I shall write this book but anybody could 
also not write it. Thus I should hide from myself the fact that 
the possibles are myself and that they are immanent conditions 
of the possibility of my possible. They would presers'e just 
enough being to preserve for my possible its character as 
gratuitous, as a free possibility for a free being, but they would 
be disarmed of their threatening character. They would not 
interest me; the chosen possible would appear — due to its 
selection— as my only concrete possible, and consequently 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 81 

tlic nothingness which separates me from it and which actually 
confers on it its possibility would collapse. 

But Bight before anguish is not only an clTort at distraction 
before the future; it attempts also to disarm the past of its 
llireat What I attempt to flee here is my very transcendence 
in so far as it sustains and surpasses my essence. I assert that 
I am my essence in the mode of being of the in-itself. At 
tlie same time I always refuse to consider that essence as 
being historically constituted and as implying my action as a 
circle implies its properties. I apprehend it, or at least I try to 
apprehend it as the original beginning of my possible, and I 
do not admit at all that it has in itself a beginning. I assert 
then that an act is free when it exactly reflects my essence. 
However, this freedom which would disturb me if it were 
freedom before myself, I attempt to bring back to the heart 
of my essence— /.e., of my self. It is a matter of envisaging 
the self as a little God which inhabits me and which possesses 
my freedom aS a metaphysical virtue. It would be no longer 
my being which would be free qua being but my Self which 
would be free in the heart of my consciousness. It is a fiction 
eminently reassuring since freedom has been driven down into 
the heart of an opaque being; to the extent that my essence 
is not translucency, that it is transcendent in immanence, 
freedom would become one of its properties. In short, it is a 
matter of apprehending my freedom in my self as the free- 
dom of another.20 We see the principal themes of this fiction: 
My self becomes the origin of its acts as the other of his, 
by virtue of a personality already constituted. To be sure, 
he (the self) lives and transforms himself; we will admit 
even that each of his acts can contribute to transforming 
him. But these harmonious, continued transformations arc 
conceived on a biological order. They resemble those which 
I can establish in my friend Pierre when I see him after a 
separation. Bergson expressly satisfied these demands for re- 
assurance when he conceived his theory of the profound self 
which endures and organizes itself, which is constantly con- 
temporary with the consciousness which I have of it and which 
can not be surpassed by consciousness, which is found at 
of my acts not as a cataclysmic pow’er but as a 
father begets his children, in such away that the act without 
follow'ing from the essence as a strict consequence, without 
c\cn being foreseeable, enters into a reassuring relation with 

** Cf. Pnrt Tlirce, Chapter One, 



82 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

it, a family resemblance. The act goes farther than the self but 
along the same road; it preserves, to be sure, a certain ir- 
reducibility, but we recognize ourselves in it, and we find 
ourselves in it as a father can recognize himself and find 
himself in the son who continues his work. Thus by a 
projection of freedom — ^which we apprehend in ourselves — 
into a psychic object which is the self, Bergson has contribut- 
ed to disguise our anguish, but it is at the expense of con- 
sciousness itself. What he has established and described in 
this manner is not our freedom as it appears to itself; it is 
the freedom of the Other. 

Such then is the totality of processes by which we try to 
hide anguish from ourselves; we apprehend our particular 
possible by avoiding considering all other possibles, which we 
make the possibles of an undifferentiated Other. The chosen 
possible we do not wish to see as sustained in being by a pure 
nihilating freedom, and so we attempt to apprehend it as 
engendered by an object already constituted, which is no 
other than our self, envisaged and described as if it were 
another person. We should like to preserve from the original 
intuition what it reveals to us as our independence and our 
responsibility but we tone down all the original nihilation in 
it; moreover we are always ready to take refuge in a belief 
in determinism if this freedom weighs upon us or if we need 
an excuse. Thus we flee from anguish by attempting to ap- 
prehend ourselves from without as an Other or as a thing. 
What we are accustomed to call a revelation of the inner sense 
or^ an original intuition of our freedom contains nothing 
original; it is an already constructed process, expressly de- 
signed to hide from ourselves anguish, the veritable “imme- 
diate given” of our freedom. 

Do these various constructions succeed in stifling or hid- 
ing our anguish? It is certain that we can not overcome an- 
guish, for we are anguish. As for veiling it, aside from the 
fact that the very nature of consciousness and its translucency 
forbid us to take the expression literally, we must note the 
particular type of behavior which it indicates. We can hide an 
external object because it exists independently of us. For 
the same reason we can turn our look or our attention away 
very simply, fix our eyes on some other 
object; henceforth each reality — mine and that of the object — 
resumes its own life, and the accidental relation which united 
consciousness to the thing disappears without thereby altering 


THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


83 


either existence. But I am what I wish to veil, the question 
takes on quite another aspect I can in fact wish “not to see” 
a certain aspect of my being only if I am acquainted with the 
aspect which I do not wish to see. This means that in my 
being I must indicate this aspect in order to be able to turn 
myself away from it; better yet, I must think of it constantly 
in order to take care not to think of it In this connection it 
must be understood not only that I must of necessity perpetu- 
ally carry within me what I wish to flee but also that I must 
aim at the object of my flight in order to flee it. This means 
that anguish, the intentional aim of anguish, and a flight 
from anguish toward reassuring myths must all be given in 
the unity of the same consciousness. In a word, I flee in order 
not to Imow, but I can not avoid knowing that I am fleeing; 
and the flight from anguish is only a mode of becoming 
conscious of anguish. Thus anguish, properly speaking, can be 
neither hidden nor avoided. 

Yet to flee anguish and to be anguish can not be exactly 
the same thing. If- 1 am my anguish in order to flee it, that 
presupposes that I can decenter myself in relation to what I 
am, feat I can be anguish in the form of “not-being it,” 
feat I can dispose of a nihilating power at the heart of an- 
guish itself. This nihilating power nihilates anguish in so far 
as I flee it and nihilates itself m so far as I am anguish in 
order to flee it. This attitude is what we call bad faith. There 
is then no question of expelling anguish from consciousness 
nor of constituting it in an unconscious psychic phenomenon; 
very simply I can make myself guilty of bad faith while ap- 
prehendmg fee anguish which I am, and this bad faith, in- 
tended to fill up the nothingness which I am in my relation to 
myself, precisely implies the nothingness which it suppresses. 

We are now at the end of our first description. The exam- 
ination of the negation can not lead us farther. It has re- 
vealed to us the existence of a particular type of conduct: 
conduct in the face of non-being, which supposes a special 
hanscendence needing separate study. We find ourselves then 
in fee presence of two human ekstases: the ekstasis which 
throws us into being-in-itself and the ekstasis which engages 
ns in non-being. It seems that our original problem, which con- 
cerned only the relations of man to being, is now consider- 
ably complicated. But in pushing our aniysis of transcen- 
dence toward non-being to its conclusion, it is possible for us 
to get valuable information for the understanding of all tran- 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


scendence. Furthermore tire problem of nothingness can not 
be excluded from our inquiry. If man adopts any particular 
behavior in the face of being-in-itself— and our philosophical 
question is a type of such behavior — it is because he is 
not this being. We rediscover non-being as a condition of 
the transcendence toward being. We must then catch hold 
of the problem of nothingness and not let it go before its 
Complete elucidation. 

However the examination of the question and of the nega- 
tion has given us all that it can. We have been referred by it 
to empirical freedom as the nihilation of man in the heart 
of temporality and as the necessary condition for the tran- 
scending apprehension of ndgatitds. It remains to found this 
empirical freedom. It can not be both the original nihilation 
and the ground of all nihilation. Actually it contributes to 
constituting transcendences in immanence which condition all 
negative transcendences. But the very fact that the tran- 
scendences of empirical freedom arc constituted in immanence 
as transcendences shows us that we arc dealing with secondary 
nihUations which suppose the existence of an original nothing- 
ness. They are only a stage in the analytical regression which 
leads us from the examples of transcendence called "‘negatites” 
to the being which is its own nothingness. Evidently it is 
necessary to find the foundation of all negation in a nihilation 
which is exercised in the very heart of immanence; in absolute 
immanence, in the pure subjectivity of the instantaneous cogito 
we must discover the original act by which man is to himself 
his own nothingness. What must be the nature of conscious- 
ness in order that man in consciousness and in terms of con- 
sciousness should arise in the world as the being who is his 

own nothingness and by whom nothingness comes into the 
world? 


We seem to lack, here the instrument to permit us to re- 
solve this new problem; negation directly engages only free- 
dom. We must find in freedom itself the conduct which will 
pernut us to push further. Now this conduct, which will lead 
threshold of immanence and which remains still 
sufficiently objective so that we can objectively disengage its 
wn itions of possibility — -this we have already encountered. 

ave we not remarked earlier that in bad faith, we are an- 
pish-in-order-to-flee-anguish within the unity of a single con- 
ciousness? If bad faith is to be possible, we should be able 
withm the same consciousness to meet with the unity of being 



THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION 


85 


and non-being — ^the' being-in-order-not-to-be. Bad faith is 
going to be the next object of our investigation. For man to 
be able to question, he must be capable of being his own 
nothingness; that is, he can be at the origin of non-being in 
being only if his being — ^in himself and by himself — ^is para- 
lyzed with nothingness. Thus the transcendences of past and 
future appear in the temporal being of human reality. But bad 
faith is instantaneous. What then are we to say that conscious- 
ness must be in the instantaneity of the pre-reflective 
cogito — if the human being is to be capable of bad faith? 



CHAPTER TWO 


Bad Faith 


I. BAD FAITH AND FALSEHOOD 

The human being is not only the being by whom negatites 
are disclosed in the world; he is also the one who can take 
negative attitudes with respect to himself. In our Introduc- 
tion we defined consciousness as “a being such that in its 
being, its being is in question in so far as this being implies 
a being other than itself.” But now that we have examined 
the meaning of “the question,” we can at present also write 
the formula thus: “Consciousness is a being, the nature of 
which is to ^ be conscious of the nothingness of its being.” 
to a prohibition or a veto, for example, the human being 
ernes a future transcendence. But this negation is not ex- 
p icative. My consciousness is not restricted to envisioning 
a negatite. It constitutes itself in its own flesh as the nihfla- 
on o a ^ssibility which another human reality projects as 
Its possibihty. For that reason it must arise in the world as a 
86 


BAD FAITH 


87 


Wo; it is as a No that the slave first apprehends the mas- 
ter, or that the prisoner who is trying to escape sees the 
guard who is watching him. There are even men (e.g., care- 
takers, overseers, gaolers), whose social reality is uniquely 
that of' the No, who will live and die, having forever been 
only a No upon the earth. Others, so as to make the No a , 
part of their very subjectivity, establish their human per- 
sonality as a perpetual negation. This is the meaning and 
function of what Scheler calls “the man of resentment” — 
in reality, the No. But there exist more subtle behaviors, 
the description of which will lead us further into the in- 
wardness of consciousness. Irony is one of these. In irony a 
man annihilates what he posits within one and the same 
act; he leads us to believe in order not to be believed; he 
aflSrms to deny and denies to affirm; he creates a positive ob- 
ject but it has no being other than its nothingness. Thus 
attitudes of negation toward the self permit us to raise a 
new question: What are we to say is the being of man who 
has the possibility of denying himself? But it is out of the 
question to discuss the attitude of “self-negation” in its uni- 
versality. The kinds of behavior which can be ranked under 
this heading are too diverse; we risk retaining only the ab- 
stract form of them. It is best to choose and to examine one 
determined attitude which is essential to human reality and 
which is such that consciousness instead of directing its ne- 
gation outward turns it toward itself. This attitude, it seems 
to me, is bad faith {mauvaise foi). 

Frequently this is identified with falsehood. We say in- 
differently of a person that he shows signs of bad faith or 
that he lies to himself. We shall willingly grant that bad 
faith is a lie to oneself, on condition that we distinguish 
the lie to oneself from lying in general. Lying is a negative 
attitude, we will agree to that. But this negation does not 
l>ear on consciousness itself; it aims only at the transcendent. 
The essence of the lie implies in fact that the liar actually 
is in complete possession of the truth which he is hiding. 
A man does not lie about what he is ignorant of; he does 
not lie when he spreads an error of which he himself is the 
dupe; he does not lie when he is mistaken. The ideal descrip- 
tion of the liar would be a, cynical consciousness, affirming 
t^th within himself, denying it in his words, and denying 
that negation as such. Now this doubly negative attitude 
rests on the transcendent; the fact expressed is transcendent 



88 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

since it does not exist, and the original negation rests on a 
truth; that is, on a particular type of transcendence. As for 
the inner negation which I effect correlatively with the afiBr- 
mation for myself of the truth, this rests on words; that is, on 
an event in the world. Furthermore the inner disposition of 
the liar is positive;* it could be the object of an affirmative 
judgment. The liar intends to deceive and he does not seek 
to hide this intention from himself nor to disguise the trans- 
lucency of consciousness; on the contrary, he has recourse to 
it when there is a question of deciding secondary behavior. 
It explicitly exercises a regulatory control over all attitudes. 
As for his flaunted intention of telling the truth (“Fd never 
want to deceive youl This is true! I swear itl”) — ^all this, 
of course, is the object of an inner negation, but also it 
is not recognized by the liar as his intention. It is played, 
imitated, it is the intention of the character which he plays 
in the eyes of his questioner, but this character, precisely 
because he does not exist, is a transcendent. Thus the lie 
does not put into the play the inner structure of present 
consciousness; all the negations which constitute it bear 
on objects which by this fact are removed from conscious- 
ness. The lie then does not require special ontological founda- 
tion, and the explanations which the existence of negation 
in general requires are valid without change in the case of 
deceit. Of course we have described the ideal lie; doubtless 
it happens often enough that the liar is more or less the 
victim of his lie, that he half persuades himself of it. But 
these common, popular forms of the lie are also degenerate 
aspects of it; they represent intermediaries between false- 
hood and bad faith. The lie is a behavior of transcendence. 

The lie is also a normal phenomenon of what Heidegger 
calls the "/nit-sein."^ It presupposes my existence, the ex- 
istence of the Other, my existence for the Other, and the 
existence of the Other for me. Thus there is no difSculty 
in holding that the liar must make the project of the lie in 
entire clarity and that he must possess a complete compre- 
hension^ of the lie and of the truth which he is altering. It 
IS sufficient that an over-all opacity hide his intentions from 
the Other; it is sufficient that the Other can take the lie 
or truth. By the lie consciousness affirms that it exists by 
nature as hidden from^ the Other; it utilizes for its own 

’•Tr. A “being-with” others in the world. 


BAD FAITH 




profit the ontological duality of myself and myself in the 
eyes of the Other. 

The situation can not be the same for bad faith if this, as 
we have said, is indeed a lie to oneself. To be sure, the one 
who practices bad faith is hiding a displeasing truth or pre- 
senting as truth a pleasing untruth. Bad faith then has in 
appearance the structure of falsehood. Only what changes 
everything is the fact that in bad faith it is from myself 
tliat I am hiding the truth. Thus the duality of the deceiver 
and the deceived does not exist here. Bad faith on the con- 
trary implies in essence the unity of a single consciousness. 
This does not mean that it can not be conditioned by tlic 
mit-sein like all other phenomena of human reality, but the 
mit-sdn can call forth bad faith only by presenting itself 
as a situation which bad faith permits surpassing; bad faith 
docs not come from outside to human reality. One does not 
undergo his bad faith; one is not infected with it; it is not 
a state. But consciousness affects itself with bad faith. 
There must be an original intention and a project of bad 
faith; this project implies a comprehension of bad faith as 
such and a pre-reflective apprehension (of) consciousness as 
affecting itself with bad faith. It follows first that the one to 
whom the lie is told and the one who lies are one and tlie 
same person, which means that I must know in my capacity 
as deceiver the truth which is hidden from me in my capaci- 
ty as the one deceived. Better yet I must know the truth 
very exactly in order to conceal it more carefully — and this 
not at two different moments, which at a pinch would al- 
low us to re-establish a semblance of duality — but in the 
unitary structure of a single project. How then can the lie 
subsist if the duality which conditions it is suppressed? 

To this difficulty is added another which is derived from 
the total translucency of consciousness. That which affects 
itolf witli bad faith must be conscious (of) its bad faith 
since the being of consciousness is consciousness of being, 
h appears then that I must be in good faith, at least to the 
that I am conscious of my bad faith. But then this 
^nole psychic system is annihilated. We must agree in fact 
that if I deliberately and cynically attempt to lie to myself, 

fail completely in this undertaking; the lie falls back and 
CO lapses beneath my look: it is ruined /rom behind by the 
^cry consciousness of lying to myself which pitilessly con- 
- Uuics itself well within my project as its very' condition. 



90 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

We have here an evanescent phenomenon which exists only 
in and through its own differentiation. To be .sure, these 
phenomena are frequent and we shall see that there is in 
fact an “evanescence” of bad faith, which, it^ is evident, 
vacillates continually between good faith and cynicism; Even 
though the existence of bad faith is very precarious, and 
though it belongs to the kind of psychic structures which 
we might call metastable, ^ it presents nonetheless an au- 
tonomous and durable form. It can even be the normal 
aspect of life for a very great number of people. A person 
can live in bad faith, which does not mean that he does not 
have abrupt awakenings to cynicism or to good faith, but 
which implies a constant and particular style of life. Our 
embarrassment then appears extreme since we can neither 
reject nor comprehend bad faith. 

To escape from these difficulties people gladly have re- 
course to the unconscious. In the psychoanalytical interpre- 
tation, for example, they use the hypothesis of a censor, 
conceived as a line of demarcation with customs, passport 
division, currency control, etc., to re-establish the duality of 
the deceiver and the deceived. Here instinct or, if you pre- 
fer, original drives and complexes of drives constituted by 
our individual history, make up reality. It is neither true 
nor false since it does not exist for itself. It simply is, ex- 
actly like this table, which is neither true nor false in itself 
but simply real. As for the conscious symbols of the in- 
stinct, this interpretation takes them not for appearances but 
for real psychic facts. Fear, forgetting, dreams exist really 
in the capacity of concrete facts of consciousness in the same 
way as the words and the attitudes of the liar are concrete, 
really existing patterns of behavior. The subject has the 
same relation to these phenomena as the deceived to the 
behavior of the deceiver. He establishes them in their re- 
^ity and must interpret them. There is a truth in the ac- 
tivities of the deceiver; if the deceived could reattach them 
to the situation where the deceiver establishes himself and 
to his project of the lie, they would become integral parts 
of truth, by virtue of being lying conduct. Similarly there is 
a truth in the symbolic acts; it is what the psychoanalyst 
iscovers when he reattaches them to the historical situation 
o t e patient, to the unconscious complexes which they 

Sartre s own word, meaning subject to sudden changes or transitions. 



BAD FAITH 


91 


express,, to the blocking of the censor. Thus the subject de- 
ceives himself about the meaning of his conduct, he appre- 
hends it in its concrete existence but not in its truth, sim- 
ply because he cannot derive it from an original situation 
and from a psychic constitution which remain alien to him. 

By the distinction between the “id” and the “ego,” Freud 
has cut the psychic whole into two. I am the ego but I am 
not the id. I hold no privileged position in relation to 
my unconscious psyche. I am my own psychic phenomena 
in so far as I establish them in their conscious reality. For 
example I am the impulse to steal this or that book from 
this bookstall. I am an integral part of the impulse; I bring 
it to light and I determine myself hand-in-hand with it to 
commit the theft. But I am not those psychic facts, in so 
far as I receive them passively and am obliged to resort to 
hypotheses about their origin and their true meaning, just 
as the scholar makes conjectures about the nature and es- 
sence of an external phenomenon. This theft, for example, 
which I interpret as an immediate impulse determined by 
the rarity, the interest, or the price of the volume which I 
am going to steal-r-it is in truth a process derived from self- 
punishment, which is attached more or less directly to an 
Oedipus complex. The impulse toward the theft contains a 
truth which can be reached only by more or less probable 
hypotheses. The criterion of this truth will be the number 
of conscious psychic facts which it explains; from a more 
pragmatic point of view it will be also the success of the 
psychiatric cure which it allows. Finally the discovery of 
this truth will necessitate the cooperation of the psycho- 
analyst, who appears as the mediator between my uncon- 
scious drives and my conscious life. The Other appears as 
being able to effect the" synthesis between the unconscious 
thesis and the conscious antithesis. I can know myself only 
through the mediation of the other, which means that I 
stand in relation to my “id,” in the position of the Other. 
If I have a little knowledge of psychoanalysis, I can, under 
circumstances particularly favorable, try to psychoanalyze my- 
self. But this attempt can succeed^ only if I distrust every 
of intuition, only if I apply to my case from the out- 
side, abstract schemes and rules already learned. As for the 
results, whether they are obtained by my efforts alone or 
^ith the cooperation of a technician, they will never have 

6 certainty which intuition confers; they will possess sim- 


92 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ply the always increasing probability of scientific hypotheses. 
The hypothesis of the Oedipus complex, like the atomic 
theory, is nothing but an “experimental idea”; as Pierce 
said, it is not to be distinguished from the totality of ex- 
periences which it allows to be realized and the results which 
it enables us to foresee. Thus psychoanalysis substitutes for 
the notion of bad faith, the idea of a lie without a liar; it 
allows me to understand how it is possible for me to be lied 
to without lying to myself since it places me in the same re- 
lation to myself that the Other is in respect to me; it replaces 
the duality of the deceiver and the deceived, the essential 
condition of the lie, by that of the “id” and the “ego.” It 
introduces into my subjectivity the deepest intersubjective 
structure of the mitsein. Can this explanation satisfy us? 

Considered more closely the psychoanalytic theory is not 
as simple as it first appears. It is not accurate to hold that 
the “id” is presented as a thing in relation to the hypothesis 
of the psychoanalyst, for a thing is indifferent to the con- 
jectures which we make concerning it, while the “id” on the 
contrary is sensitive to them when we approach the truth. 
Freud in fact reports resistance when at the end of the first 
period the doctor is approaching the truth. This resistance 
is objective behavior apprehended from without: the patient 
shows defiance, refuses to speak, gives fantastic accounts of 
his dreams, sometimes even removes himself completely from 
the psychoanalytic treatment. It is a fair question to ask what 
part of himself can thus resist. It can not be the “Ego,” en- 
visaged as a psychic totality of the facts of consciousness; 
this could not suspect that the psychiatrist is approaching 
the end since the ego’s relation to the meaning of its own 
reactions is exactly like that of the psychiatrist himself. At 
the very most it is possible for the ego to appreciate objec- 
tively the degree of probability in the hypotheses set forth, 
as a witness of the psychoanalysis might be able to do, ac- 
cording to the number of subjective facts which they ex- 
plain. Furthermore, this probability would appear to the ego 
to border on certainty, which he could not take offense at 
since most of the tune it is he who by a conscious decision 
is in pursuit of the psychoanalytic therapy. Are we to say 
that the patient is disturbed by the daily revelations which 
Ae psychoanalyst makes to him and that he seeks to remove 
hi^eu, at the same time pretending in his own eyes to 
wish to continue the treatment? In this case it is no longer 



BAD FAITH 


93 


possible to resort to the unconscious to explain bad faith; 
it is there in full consciousness, with all its contradictions. 
But this is not the way that the psychoanalyst means to 
explain this resistance; for him it is secret and deep, it comes 
from afar; it has its roots in the very thing which the psy- 
choanalyst is trying to make clear. 

Furthermore it is equally impossible to explain the re- 
sistance as emanating from the complex which the psycho- 
analyst wishes to bring to light. The complex as such is 
rather the collaborator of the psychoanalyst since it aims at 
expressing itself in clear consciousness, since it plays tricks/ 
on the censor and seeks to elude it. The only level on which 
we can locate the refusal of the subject is that of the censor. 

It alone can comprehend the questions or the revelations of 
the psychoanalyst as approaching more or less near to the 
real drives which it strives to repress — it alone because it 
alone knows what it is repressing. 

If we reject the language and the materialistic mythology 
of psychoanalysis, we perceive that the censor in order to 
apply its activity with discernment must know what it is re- 
pressing. In fact if we abandon all the metaphors represent- 
ing the repression as the impact of blind forces, we are com- 
pelled to admit that the censor must choose and in order to 
choose must be aware of so doing. How could it happen 
otherwise that the censor allows lawful sexual impulses to 
pass through, that it permits needs (hunger, thirst, sleep) 
to be^ expressed in clear consciousness? And how are we to 
explain that it can relax its surveillance, that it can even be 
deceived by the disguises of the instinct? But it is not suffi- 
cient that it discern the condemned drives; it must also ap- 
prehend them as to be repressed, which implies in it at the - 
very least an awareness of its activity. In a word, how could 
the censor discern the impulses needing to be repressed 
without being conscious of discerning them? How can we 
conceive of a knowledge which is ignorant of itself? To 
know is to know that one knows, said Alain. Let us say 
rather: All knowing is consciousness of knowing. Thus the 
resistance of the patient implies on the level of the censor 
an awareness of the thing repressed as such, a comprehen- 
sion of the end toward which the questions of the psycho- 
an^yst are leading, and an act of synthetic connection by 
which it compares the truth of the repressed complex to 
6 psychoanalytic hypothesis which aims at it. These vari- , 



94 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ous operations in their turn imply that the censor is con- 
scious (of) itself. But what, type of self-consciousness can 
the censor have? It must be the consciousness (of) being 
conscious of the drive to be repressed, but precisely in order 
not to be conscious of it. What does this mean if not that the 
censor is in bad faith? 

Psychoanalysis has not gained anything for us since in 
order to overcome bad faith, it has established between the 
unconscious and consciousness an autonomous consciousness 
in bad faith. The effort to establish a veritable duality and 
even a trinity {Es, Ich, Ueberich expressing themselves 
through the censor) has resulted in a mere verbal tcrminol- 
“ogy. The very essence of the reflexive idea of hiding some- 
thing from oneself implies the unity of one and the same 
psychic mechanism and consequently a double activity in the 
heart of unity, tending on the one Jiand to maintain and 
locate the thing to be concealed and on the other hand to 
repress and disguise it. Each • of the* two aspects of this ac- 
tivity is complementary to the other; that is, it implies the 
other in its being. By separating consciousness from the un- 
conscious by means of the censor, psychoanalysis has not 
succeeded in dissociating the two phases of the act, since 
the libido is a blind conatus toward conscious expression 
and since the conscious phenomenon is a passive, faked re- 
sult. Psychoanalysis has merely localized this double activity 
of repulsion and attraction on the level of the censor. 

Furthermore the problem still remains of accounting for 
the unity of the total phenomenon (repression of the drive 
which disguises itself and “passes” in symbolic form), to 
establish comprehensible connections among its different 
phases. How can .the repressed drive “disguise itself” if it 
does not include (1) the consciousness of being repressed, 
(2) the consciousness of having been pushed back because 
it is what it is, (3) a project of disguise? No mechanistic 
theop^ of condensation or of ^ansference can explain these 
modifications by which the ®ve itself is affected, for the 
description of the process of disguise implies a veiled ap- 
peal to finality. And similarly how are we to account for 
Ae pleasure or the anguish which accompanies the sym- 
bolic and conscious satisfaction of the drive if consciousness 
does not include — ^beyond the censor — an obscure compre- 
hension of - the end to be attained as simultaneously desired 
and forbidden? By rejecting the conscious unity of the psy- 



•BAD FAITH 


95 


che, Freud is obliged to imply ever5where a magic unity 
linking distant phenomena across obstacles, just as sympa- 
thetic magic unites the spellbound person and the wax image 
fashioned in his likeness. The imconscious drive (Trieb) 
through ndagic is endowed with the character “repressed” or 
“condemned,” which completely pervades it, colors it, and 
magically provokes its symbolism. Similarly the conscious 
phenomenon is entirely colored by its symbolic meaning al- 
though it can not apprehend this meaning by itself in clear 
consciousness. 

Aside from its , inf eriority in principle, the explanation by,- 
magic does not avoid the coexistence — on the level of the', 
unconscious, on that of the censor, and on that of conscious- 
ness — of two contradictory, complementary structures which 
reciprocally imply and destroy each other. Proponents of the ‘ 
theory have hypostasized and “reified” bad faith; they have 
not escaped it. This is what has inspired a Viennese psy- 
chiatrist," Stekel, to depart from the psychoanalytical tradi- 
'tion and to write in La femme frigide:^ “Every time that I 
have been able to carry my investigations far enough, I have 
established that the crux of the psychosis was conscious.” In 
addition the cases which he reports in his work bear witness 
to a pathological bad faith which the Freudian doctrine can 
not account for. There is the question, for example, of wom- 
en whom marital infidelity has made frigid; that is, they 
succeed in hiding froin themselves not complexes deeply 
sunk in half physiological darkness, but acts of conduct 
which are objectively discoverable, which they can not fall 
. to record at the moment when they perform them. Frequent- 
ly in fact the husband reveals to Stekel that his wife has 
•^ven objective signs of pleasure, but the woman when ques- 
tioned will fiercely deny them. Here we find a pattern of 
distraction. Admissions which Stekel was able to draw out 
inform us that these pathologically frigid women apply them- 
selves to becoming distracted in advance from the pleasure 
which they dread; many for example at the time of the sex- 
ual act, turn their thoughts away toward their daily occupa- 
tions, make up their household accounts. Will anyone speak 
of an unconscious here? Yet if the frigid woman thus dis- 
tracts her consciousness from the pleasure which she experi- 
ences, it is by no means cynically and in fuU agreement with 
herself; it is in order to prove to herself that she is frigid. 

® Paris: GaUimard. 


96 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

We have in fact to deal with a phenomenon of bad faith 
since the efforts taken in order not to be present to the ex- 
perienced pleasure imply the recognition that the pleasure 
is experienced; they imply it in order to deny it. But we 
are no longer on the ground of psychoanalysis. Thus on the 
one hand the explanation by means of the unconscious, due 
to the fact that it breaks the psychic unity, can not account 
for the facts which at first sight it appeared to explain. And 
on the other hand, there exists an infinity of types of be- 
havior in bad faith which explicitly reject this kind of ex- 
planation because their essence implies that they can appear 
only in the translucency of consciousness. We find that the 
problem which we had attempted to resolve is still un- 
touched. 


n. PATTERNS OF BAD FAITH 


If we wish to get out of this difficulty, we should examine 
more closely the patterns of bad faith and attempt a de- 
scription of them. This description will permit us perhaps to 
fix more exactly the conditions for the ^possibility of bad 
faith; that is, to reply to the question we raised at the out- 
set: “What must be the being of man if he is to be capable 
of bad faith?” 


Take the example of a woman who has consented to go 
out with a particular man for the first time. She knows very 
well the intentions which the man who is speaking to her 
cherishes regarding her. She knows also that it will be nec- 
essary sooner or later for her to make a decision. But she 
does not want to realize the urgency; she concerns herself 
only with what is respectful and discreet in the attitude of 
her companion. She does not apprehend this conduct as an 
attempt to achieve what we call “the first approach”; that 
is, she does not want to see possibilities of temporal devel- 
opment which his^ conduct presents. She restricts this be- 
havior to what is in the present; she does not wish to read 
in the phrases which he addresses to her anything other than 
their explicit meaning. If he says to her, “I find you so at- 
tractive!” she disarms this phrase of its sexual background; 
She attaches to the conversation and to the behavior of the 

^ V meanings, which she imagines as ob- 

1 ve qualities. The man who is speaking to her appears 



BAD FAITH 


97 


to her sincere and respectful as the table is round or square, 
as the wall coloring is blue or gray. The qualities thus at- 
tached to the person she is listening to are in this way fixed 
■ in a permanence like that of things, which is no other than 
the projection of the strict present of the qualities into the 
temper^ flux. Thk is because she does not quite know what 
she wants. She is profoundly aware of the desire which she 
inspires, but the desire cruel and naked would humiliate and 
horrify her. Yet she would find no charm in a respect which 
would be only respect. In order to satisfy her, there must be 
a feeling which is addressed wholly to her personality — z.e., 
to her full freedom — and which would be a recognition of 
her freedorn. But at the same time this feeling must be 
wholly desire; that is, it must address itself to her body as 
object This time then she refuses to apprehend the desire 
for what it is; she does not even give it a name; she recog- 
nizes it only to the extent that it transcends itself toward 
admiration, esteem, respect and that it is wholly absorbed 
in the more refined forms which it produces, to the extent 
of no longer figuring anymore as a sort of warmth and densi- 
ty. But then suppose he takes her hand. This act of her 
companion risks changing the situation by calling for an 
immediate decision. To leave the hand there is to consent in 
herself to flirt, to engage herself. To withdraw it is to break 
the troubled and unstable harmony which gives the hour its 
charm. The aim is to postpone the moment of decision as 
. long as possible. We know what happens next; the young 
woman leaves her hand there, but she does not notice that 
-she is leaving it. She does not notice because it happens by 
chance that she is at this moment all intellect. She draws 
her companion up to the most lofty regions of sentimental 
speculation; she speaks of Life, of her life, she shows her- 
self in her essential aspect — a personality, a consciousness, 
^d during this time the divorce of the body from the soul 
is accomplished; the - hand rests inert between the warm 
hands of her companion — neither consenting nor resisting 
— a thing. 

^ We shall say that this woman is in bad faith. But we see 
immediately that she uses various procedures in order to 
maintain herself in this bad faith. She has disarmed the ac- 
tions of her companion by reducing them to being only 
what they are; that is, to existing in the mode of the in- 
itself. But she permits herself to enjoy his desire, to the ex- 



98 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

tent that she will apprehend it as not being what it is, 
will recognize its transcendence. Finally while sensing pro- 
foundly the presence of her own body — to the point of 
being aroused, perhaps — ^she realizes herself as not being her 
own body, and she contemplates it as though from above 
as a passive object to which events can happen but which 
can neither provoke them nor avoid them because all its 
possibilities are outside of it. What unity do we find in 
these various aspects of bad faith? It is a certain art of form- 
ing contradictory concepts which unite in themselves both 
an idea and the negation of that idea. The basic concept 
which is thus engendered utilizes the double property of 
the human being, who is at once a facticity and a transcen- 
dence. These two aspects of human reality are and ought 
to be capable of a valid coordination. But bad faith does 
not wish either to coordinate them or to surmount them 
in a synthesis. Bad faith seeks to affirm their identity while 
preserving their differences. It must affirm facticity as being 
transcendence and transcendence as being facticity, in such 
a way that at the instant when a person apprehends the one, 
he can find himself abruptly faced with the other. 

We can find the prototype of formulae of bad faith in 
certain famous expressions which have been rightly con- 
ceived to produce their whole effect in a spirit of bad faith. 
Take for example the title of a work by Jacques Chardonne, 
Love Is Much More than Love.^ We see here how unity is 
established between present love in its facticity — “the con- 
tact of two skins,” sensuality, egoism, Proust’s mechanism 
of jealousy, Adler’s battle of the sexes, etc. — and love as 
transcendence — ^Mauriac’s “river of fire,” the longing for the 
m fini te, Plato’s eras, Lawrence’s deep cosmic intuition, etc. 
Here we leave facticity to find ourselves suddenly beyond 
the present and the factual condition of man, beyond the 
psychological, in the heart of metaphysics. On the other 
hand, the title of a play by Sarment, I Am Too Great for 
Myself,^ which also presents characters in bad faith, throws 
us first into full transcendence in order suddenly to imprison 
us within the narrow lunits of our factual essence. We will 
discover this structure again in the famous sentence; “He 
has become what he was” or in its no less famous opposite: 

^L’ amour, c’est beaucoup plus que V amour, 

5/e suis trap grand pour mol. 



BAD FAITH 


99 


“Eternity pt last changes, each man into himself.”® It is well 
understood that these various formulae have only the ap- 
pearance of bad faith; they have been conceived in this 
paradoxical form explicitly, to shock the mind and discoun- 
tenance it by an enigma. But it is precisely this appearance 
which is of concern to us. What counts here is that the for- 
mulae do not constitute new, solidly structured ideas; on the 
contrary, they are formed so as to remain in perpetual dis- 
integration and so that we may slide at any time from nat- 
uralistic present to transcendence and vice versa. 

We can see the use which bad faith can make of these 
judgments which all aim at establishing that I am not what 
I am. If I were only what I am, I could, for example, seri- 
ously consider an adverse criticism which someone makes of 
me, question myself scrupulously, and perhaps be compelled 
to recognize the truth in it. But thanks to transcendence, I 
am not subject to all that I am. I do hot even have to dis- 
cuss the justice of the reproach. As Suzanne says to Figaro, 
“To prove that I am right would be to recognize that I can 
be wrong.” I am on a plane where no reproach can touch 
me since what I really am is my transcendence. I flee from 
myself, I escape myself, I leave my tattered garment in the 
hands of the fault-finder. But the ambiguity necessary for 
bad faith comes from the fact that I aflhm here that I am 
my transcendence in the mode of being of a thing. It is only 
thus, in fact, that I can feel that I escape all reproaches. It 
is in the sense that our young woman purifies the desire of 
anything humiliating by being willing to consider it only 
zs pure transcendence, which she avoids even naming. But 
inversely “I Am Too Great for Myself,” while showing our 
hanscendence changed into faclicity, is the source of an 
infinity of excuses for our failures or our weaknesses. Simi- 
larly the young coquette maintains transcendence to the ex- 
tent that the respect, the esteem manifested by the actions 
of her admirer are already on the plane of the transcendent. 
But she arrests this transcendence, she glues it down with 
all the facticity of the present; respect is nothing other than 
respect, it is an arrested surpassing which no longer sur- 
passes itself toward anything. 

But although this metastable concept of “transcendence- 
facticity” is one of the most basic instruments of bad faith, 

est devenu ce qu'il itait. 

Tel qu’en luUmeme enfin I’dternite le change. 



100 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

it is not the only one of its kind. We can equally weU use 
another kind of duplicity derived from human reality which 
we will express roughly by saying that its being-for-itself 
implies complementarily a being-for-others. Upon any one 
of my conducts it is always possible to converge two looks, 
mine and that of the Other. The conduct will not present 
exactly the same structure in each case. But as we shall see 
later, as each look perceives it, there is between these two 
aspects of my being, no difference between appearance and 
being — as if I were to my self the truth of myself and as if 
the Other possessed only a deformed image of me. The equal 
dignity of being, possessed by my being-for-others and by 
my being-for-myself, permits a perpetually disintegrating syn- 
thesis and a perpetual game of escape from the for-itself to 
the for-others and from the for-others to the for-itself. We 
have seen also the use which our young lady made of our 
being-in-the-midst-of-the-world — i.e., of our inert presence 
as a passive object among other objects — ^in order to relieve 
herself suddenly from the functions of her being-in-the 
world — ^that is, from the being which causes there to be a 
world by projecting itself beyond the world toward its own 
possibilities. Let us note finally the confusing syntheses which 
play on the nihilating ambiguity of these temporal ekstases, 
affirming at once that I am what I have been (the man who 
deliberately arrests himself at one period in his life and 
refuses to take into consideration the later changes) and 
that I am not what I have been (the man who in the face 
of reproaches or rancor dissociates himself from his past by 
insisting on his freedom and on his perpetual re-creation). 
In all these concepts, which have only a transitive role in 
the reasoning and which are eliminated from the conclusion 
(like the imaginaries in the computations of physicists), we 
find^ again the same structure. We have to deal with human 
reality as a being which is what it is not and which is not 
what it is. 

But what exactly is necessary in order for these concepts 
of ^ disinte^ation to be able to receive even a pretence of 
existence, in order for them to be able to appear for an in- 
stant to consciousness, even in a process of evanescence? A 
qu^k ejmmination of the idea of sincerity, the antithesis of 
bad faith, will be very_ instructive in 'this connection. Actu- 
a y smcerity presents itself as a demand and consequently 
IS not a state. Now what is the ideal to be attained in this 



BAD FAITH 


101 


case? It is necessary that a man be for himself only what he 
is. But is this not precisely the definition of the in-itself — 
or if you prefer — the principle of identity? To posit as an 
ideal the being of things, is this not to assert by the same 
stroke that this being does not belong to human reality and 
that the principle of identity, far from being a universal 
axiom universally applied, is only a synthetic principle en- 
joying a merely regional universality? Thus in order that 
the concepts of bad iaith can put us under illusion at least 
for an instant, in order that the candor of “pure hearts” 
(cf. Gide, Kessel) can have validity for human reality as 
an ideal, the principle of identity must not represent a con- 
stitutive principle of human reality and human reality must 
not be necessarily what it is but must be able to be what it 
is not What does this mean? 

If man is what he is, bad faith is forever impossible and 
candor ceases to be his ideal and becomes instead his being. 
But is man what he is? And more generally, how can he 
be what he is when he exists as consciousness of being? If 
candor or sincerity is a universal value, it is evident that the 
maxim “one must be what one is” does not serve solely as a 
regulating principle for judgments and concepts by which 
I express what I am. It posits not merely an ideal of know- 
ing but an ideal of being; it proposes for us an absolute 
equivalence of being with itself as a prototype of being. In 
this sense it is necessary that we make ourselves what we 
are But what are we then if we have the constant obligation 
to make ourselves what we are, if our mode of being is hav- 
ing the obligation to be what we are? 

Let us consider this waiter in the cafe. His movement is 
quick and forward, a little too precise, a little too rapid. He 
comes toward the patrons with a step a little too quick. He 
bends forward a little too eagerly; his voice, his eyes express 
an interest a little too solicitous for the order of the cus- 
tomer. Finally there he returns, trying to imitate in his walk 
the inflexible stiffness of some kind of automaton while car- 
rying his tray with the recklessness of a tight-rope-walker 
y putting it in a perpetually unstable, perpetually broken 
equilibrium which he perpetually re-establishes by a light 
movement of the arm and hand. All his behavior seems to 
^ a game. He applies himself to chaining his movements as 

they were mechanisms, the one regulating the other; his 
gestures and even his voice seem to be mechanisms; he gives 


102 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

himself the quickness and pitiless rapidity of things. He is 
playing, he is amusing himself. But what is he playing? We 
need not watch long before we can explain it. he is playing 
at being a waiter in a cafe. There is nothing there to sur- 
prise us. The game is a kind of marking out and investiga- 
tion. The child plays with his body in order to explore it, 
to take inventory of it; the waiter in the cafd^ plays with Ws 
condition in order to realize it. This obligation is not dif- 
ferent from that which is imposed on all tradesmen. Their 
condition is wholly one of ceremony. The public demands 
of them that they realize it as a ceremony; there is the dance 
of the grocer, of the tailor, of the auctioneer, by which they 
endeavor to persuade their clientele that they are nothing 
but a grocer, an auctioneer, a tailor. A grocer who dreams is 
offensive to the buyer, because such a grocer is not wholly a 
grocer. Society demands that he limit himself to his function 
as a grocer, just as the soldier at attention makes himself 
into a soldier-thing with a direct regard which does not see 
at all, which is no longer meant to see, since it is the rule 
and not the interest of the moment which determines the 
point he must fix his eyes on (the sight “fixed at ten paces”)* 
There are indeed many precautions to imprison a man in 
what he is, as if we lived in perpetual fear that he might 
escape from it, that he might break away and suddenly 
elude his condition. 

In a parallel situation, from within, the waiter in the cafe 
can not be immediately a cafe waiter in the sense that this 
inkwell is an inkwell, or the glass is a glass. It is by no 
means that he can not form reflective judgments or concepts 
concerning his condition. He knows well what it “means”: 
the obligation of getting up at five o’clock, of sweeping the 
floor of the shop before the restaurant opens, of starting 
the coffee pot going, etc. He knows the rights which it al- 
lows: the right to the tips, the right to belong to a union, 
etc. But all these concepts, all these judgments refer to the 
transcendent. It is a matter of abstract possibilities, of rights 
and duties conferred on a “person possessing rights.” And 
It js precisely this person who I have to be (if I am the 
waiter in question) and who I am not. It is not that I do 
not wish to be this person or that I want this person to be 
^ent. But rather there is no common measure between 
his being and mine. It is a “representation” for others and 
tor myself, which means that I can be he only in representa- 



BAD FAITH 


103 


tion. But if I represent myself as him, I am not he; I am 
separated from him as the object from the subject, separated 
by nothing, but this nothing isolates me from him. I can 
not be he, I can only play at being him; that is, imagine to 
myself that I am he. And thereby I affect him with nothing- 
ness. In vain do I fulJBll the functions of a cafe waiter. I can 
be he only in the neutralized mode, as the actor is Hamlet, 
by mechanically making the typical gestures of my state and 
by aiming at myself as an imaginary cafe waiter through 
those gestures taken as an “analogue.”'’^ What I attempt to 
realize is a being-in-itself of the cafe waiter, as if it were not 
just in my power to confer their value' and their urgency 
upon my duties and the rights of my position, as if it were 
not my free choice to get up each morning at five o’clock or 
to remain in bed, even though it meant getting fired. As if 
from the very fact that I sustain this role in existence I did 
not transcend it on every side,.^as if I did not constitute 
myself as one beyond my condition. Yet there is no doubt 
that I flm in a sense a cafe waiter-otherwise could I not just 
as well call myself a diplomat or a reporter? But if am one, 
this can not be in the mode of being in-itself. I am a waiter 
in the mode of being what I am not. 

Furthermore we are dealing with more than mere social 
positions; I am never any one of my attitudes, any one of 
my actions. The good speaker is the one who plays at speak- 
ing, because he can not be speaking. The attentive pupil 
who wishes to be attentive, his eyes riveted on the teacher, 
his ears wide open, so exhausts himself in playing the at-’ 
tentive role that he ends up by no longer hearing anything. 
Fep)etually absent to my body, to my acts, I am despite my- 
self that “divine absence” of which Valery speaks. I can not 
say either that I am here or that I am not here, in the sense 
, ^ “that box of matches is on the table”; this 
would be to confuse my “being-in-the-world” with a “being- 
Jn- e-midst-of-the-world.” Nor that I am standing, nor that 
am seated; this would be to confuse my body with the idio- 
yncratic totality of which it is only one of the structures. On 
sides I escape being and yet— I am. 

am ^ mode of being which concerns only myself: I 

, • One might think that surely I am the sadness in the 

P'^j'c^o/og/e pMnomSnologique de Vimagmatwn. Paris: 
194S.] ’ ■ Psychology of Imagination. Philosophical Library. 



104 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


mode of being what I am. What is the sadness, however, if 
not the intentional unity which comes to reassemble and 
animate the totality of my conduct? It is the meaning of 
this dull look with which I view the world, of my bowed 
shoulders, of my lowered head, of the listlessness in my 
whole body. But at the very moment when I adopt each of 
these attitudes, do I not know that I shall not be able to 
hold on to it? Let a stranger suddenly appear and I will lift 
up my head, I will assume a lively cheerfulness. What will 
remain of my sadness except that I obligingly promise it an 
appointment for later after the departure of the visitor? 
Moreover is not this sadness itself a conduct? Is it not con- 
sciousness which affects itself with sadness as a magical re- 
course against a situation too urgent?® And in this case even, 
should we not say that being sad means first to make oneself 
sad? That may be, someone will say, but after all doesn’t 
giving oneself the being of sadness mean to receive this 
being? It makes no difference from where I receive it. The 
fact is that a consciousness which affects itself with sadness 
is sad precisely for this reason. But it is difiicult to compre- 
hend the nature of consciousness; the being-sad is not a 
ready-made being which I give to myself as I can give this 
book to my friend. I do not possess the property of affecting 
myself with being. If I make myself sad, I must continue 
to make myself sad from beginning to end. I can not treat 
my sadness as an impulse finally achieved and put it on file 
without re-creating it, nor can I carry it in the manner of an 
inert body which continues its movement after the initial 
shock. There is no inertia in consciousness. If I make myself 
sad, it is because I am not sad — ^the being of the sadness es- 
capes me by and in the very act by which I affect myself 
with it. The being-in-itself of sadness perpetually haunts my 
consciousness (of) being sad, but it is as a value which I 
can not realize; it stands as a regulative meaning of my sad- 
ness, not as its constitutive modality. 

Someone may say that my consciousness at least is, what- 
ever may be the object or the state of which it makes itself 
consciousness. But how do we distinguish my consciousness 
(of) being sad from sadness? Is it not all one? It is true in 
a way that my consciousness is, if one means by this that 
or another it is a part of the totality of being on which 


Sfisgujjse d’ttne z/ieor/e des emotions. Paris: Hermann. 1939. In English 
The Emotions: Outline of a Theory. Philosophical Library. 1948. 



BAD FAITH 


105 


judgments can be brought to bear. But it should be noted, as 
Husserl clearly understood, that my consciousness appears 
originally to the Other as an absence. It is the object always 
present as the meaning of all my attitudes and all my con- 
duct— and always absent, for it gives itself to the intuition 
of another as a perpetual question — still better, as a per- 
petual freedom. When Pierre looks at me, I know of course 
that he is looking at me. His eyes, things in the world, are 
fixed on my body, a thing in the world — ^that is the objec- 
tive fact of which ! can say: it is. But it is also a fact in the 
world. The rheaning of this look is not a fact in the world, 
and this is what makes me uncomfortable. Although I make 
smiles, promises, threats, nothing can get hold of the ap- 
probation, the free judgment which I seek; I know that it is 
always beyond. I sense it in my very attitude, which is no 
longer like that of the worker toward the things he uses as 
instruments. My reactions, to the extent that I project myself 
toward the Other, are no longer for myself but are rather 
mere presentations; they await being constituted as graceful 
or uncouth, sincere or insincere, etc., by an apprehension 
which is always beyond my efforts to provoke, an apprehen- 
sion which will be provoked by my efforts only if of itself 
it lends them force (that is, only in so far as it causes itself 
to be provoked from the outside), which is its own mediator 
with the transcendent. Thus the objective fact of the being- 
in-itself of the Other’s consciousness is posited in order 
to disappear in negativity and in freedom: the Other’s con- 
sciousness is as not-being; its being-in-itself “here and now” 
is not-to-be. 

The Other’s consciousness is what it is not. 

Furthermore the being of my own consciousness does not 
appear lo me as the consciousness of the Other. It is because 
U makes itself, since its being is consciousness of being. But 
IS means that making sustains being; consciousness has to 
e Its own being, it is never sustained by being; it sustains 
eing^ in the heart of subjectivity, which means once again 
^t It is inhabited by being but that it is not being: con- 
sciousness is not what it is. 

th these conditions what can be the significance of 
sincerity except as a task impossible to achieve, 
turp ■'^ery meaning is in contradiction with the struc- 

consciousness. To be sincere, we said, is to be 
Quc is. That supposes that I am not originally what 



106 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


I am. But here naturally Kant’s “You ought, therefore you 
can” is implicitly understood. I can become sincere; this is 
what my duty and my effort to achieve sincerity imply. But 
we definitely establish that the original structure of “not 
being what one is” renders impossible in advance all move- 
ment toward being in itself or “being what one is.” And 
this impossibility is not hidden from consciousness; on the 
contrary, it is the very stuff of consciousness; it is the em- 
barrassing constraint which we constantly experience; it is our 
very incapacity to recognize ourselves, to constitute ourselves 
as being what we are. It is this necessity which means that, 
as soon as we posit ourselves as a certain being, by a legiti- 
mate judgment, based on inner experience or correctly de- 
duced from a priori or empirical premises, then by that 
very positing we surpass this being — and that not toward 
another being but toward emptiness, toward nothing. 

How then can we blame another for not being sincere or 
rejoice in our own sincerity since this sincerity appears to us 
at the same time to be impossible? How can we in conversa- 
tion, in confession, in introspection, even attempt sincerity 
since the effort will by its very nature be doomed to failure 
and since at the very time when we announce it we have a 


prejudicative comprehension of its futility? In introspection 
I try to determine exactly what I am, to make up my mind 
to be my true self without delay — even though it means 
consequently to set about searching for ways to change ray- 
self. But what does this mean if not that I am constituting 
myself as a thing? Shall I determine the ensemble of pur- 
poses and motivations which have pushed me to do this or 
that^ action? But this is already to postulate a causal deter- 
minism which constitutes the flow of my states of conscious- 
ness as a succession of physical states. Shall T uncover in 
myself drives,” even though it be to afiSrm them in shame? 
But^ is this not deliberately to forget that these drives are 
reali^d with my consent, that they are not forces of nature 
but that I lend them their efficacy by a perpetually renewed 
decision concerning their value? ShaU I pass judgment on 
my character, on my nature? Is this not to veil from myself 
at that moment what I know only too well, that I thus judge 
a past to which by definition my present is not subject? The 

same man who in sincerity posits 
that he IS what in actuality he was, is indignant at the re- 
proach of another and tries to disarm it by asserting that he 



BAD FAITH 


107 


can no longer be what he was. We are readily astonished 
and upset when the penalties of the court affect a man who 
in his new. freedom is no longer the guilty person he was. 
But at the same time we require of this man that he recog- 
nize himself as being this guilty one. What then is sincerity 
except precisely a phenomenon of bad faith? Have we not 
shown indeed that in bad faith human reality is constituted 
as a being which is what it is not and which is not what 
it is? 

Let us take an example: A homosexual frequently has an 
intolerable feeling of guilt, and his whole existence is de- 
termined in relation to this feeling. One will readily foresee 
that he is in bad faith. In fact it frequently happens that 
this man, while recognizing his homosexual inclination, while 
avowing each and every particular misdeed which he has 
committed, refuses with all his strength to consider himself 
"a paederast." His case is always “different,” peculiar; there 
enters into it something of a game, of chance, of bad luck; 
the mistakes are all in the past; they are explained by a cer- 
tain conception of the beautiful which women can not sat- 
isfy; we should see in them the results of a restless search, 
rather than the manifestations of a deeply rooted tendency, 
etc., etc. Here is assuredly a man in bad faith who borders 
on the comic since, acknowledging all the facts which are 
imputed to him, he refuses to draw from them the conclu- 
sion which they impose. His friend, who is his most severe 
critic, becomes irritated with this duplicity. The critic asks 
only one thing — and perhaps then he will show himself in- 
dulgent: that the guilty one recognize himself as guilty, that 
the homosexual declare frankly — whether humbly or boast- 
fully matters little — ^“1 am a paederast.” We ask here: Who 
IS in bad faith? The homosexual or the champion of sin- 
cerity? 

The homosexual recognizes his faults, but he struggles 
with all his strength against the crushing view that his mis- 
t^es constitute for him a destiny. He does not wish to let 
himself be considered as a thing. He has an obscure but 
strong feeling that a homosexual is not a homosexual as 
^ table is a table or as this red-haired man is red-haired, 
tt seems to him that he has escaped from each mistake as 
soon as he has posited it and recognized it; he even feels 

at the psychic duration by itself cleanses him from each 
hiisdeed, constitutes for him an undetermined future, causes 



108 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

him to be born anew. Is he wrong? Does he not recognize 
in himself the peculiar, irreducible character of human re- 
ality? His attitude includes then an undeniable comprehen- 
sion of truth. But at the same time he needs this perpetual 
rebirth, this constant escape in order to live; he must con- 
stantly put himself beyond reach in order to avoid the ter- 
rible judgment of collectivity. Thus he plays on the word 
being. He would be right actually if he understood the 
phrase “I am not a paederast” in the sense of “I am not 
what I am.” That is, if he declared to himself, “To the ex- 
tent that a pattern of conduct is defined as the conduct of a 
paederast and to the extent that I have adopted this con- 
duct, I am a paederast. But to the extent that human reality 
can not be finally defined by patterns of conduct, I am not 
one.” But instead he slides surreptitiously toward a different 
connotation of the word “being.” He understands “not be- 
ing” in the sense of “not-being-in-itself.” He lays claim to 
“not being a paederast” in the sense in which this table 
is not an inkwell. He is in bad faith. 

But the champion of sincerity is not ignorant of the tran- 
scendence of human reality, and he knows how at need to 
appeal to it for his own advantage. He makes use of it even 
and brings it up in the present argument. Does he not wish, 
first in the name of sincerity, then of freedom, that the ho- 
mosexual reflect on himself and acknowledge himself as a 
homosexual? Does he not let the other understand that such 
a confession will win indulgence for him? What does this 
mean if not that the man who will acknowledge himself as 
a homosexual will no longer be the same as the homosexual 
whom he acknowledges being and that he will escape into 
the region of freedom and of good will? The critic asks 
the man then to be what he, is in order no longer to be what 
he is. It is the profound meaning of the saying, “A sin con- 
fessed is half pardoned.” The critic demands of the guilty 
one that he constitute himself as a thing, precisely in order 
no longer to treat him as a thing. And this contradiction is 
constitutive^ of the demand of sincerity. Who can not see 
how offensive to the Other and how reassuring for me is a 
statenient such as, “He’s just a paederast,” which removes a 
disturbmg freedom from a trait and which aims at hence- 
orth constituting all the acts of the Other as consequences 
o owing strictly from his essence. That is actually what the 
critic IS demanding of his victim— that he constitute himself 



BAD FAITH 


109 


as a thing, -that he should entrust his freedom to his friend 
as a fief, in order that the friend should return it to him sub- 
sequently — ^like a suzerain to ^ his vassal. The champion of 
sincerity is in bad faith to the degree that in order to re- 
assure himself, he pretends to judge, to the extent that he 
demands that freedom as freedom constitute itself as a thing. 
We have here only one episode in that battle to the death 
of consciousnesses which Hegel calls “the relation of the 
master and the slave.” A person appeals to another and de- 
mands that in the name of his nature as consciousness he 
should radically destroy himself as consciousness, but v/hile 
making this appeal he leads the other to hope for a rebirth 
beyond this destruction. 

Very well, someone will say, but our man is abusing sin- 
cerity, playing one side against the other. We should not 
look for sincerity in the relation of the tnit-sein but rather 
where it is pure — ^in the relations of a person with himself. 
But who can not see that objective sincerity is constituted 
in the same way? Who can not see that the sincere man con- 
stitutes himself as a thing in order to escape the condition 
of a thing by the same act of sincerity? The man who con- 
fesses that he is evil has exchanged his disturbing “freedom- 
for-evil” for an inanimate character of evil; he is evil, he 
clings to himself, he is what he is. But by the same stroke, 
he escapes from that thing, since it is he who contemplates 
it, since it depends on him to maintain it under his glance 
or to let it collapse in an infinity of particular acts. He de- 
rives a merit from his sincerity, and the deserving man is not 
the evil man as he is evU but as he is beyond his evilness. 
At the same time the evil is disarmed since it is nothing, 
save on the plane of determinism, and since in confessing 
it, I posit my freedom in respect to it; my future is virgin; 
everything is allowed to me. 

Thus the essential structure of sincerity does not differ 
from that of bad faith since the sincere man constitutes him- 
self as what he is in order not to be it. This explains the 
truth reco^ized by all that one can fall into bad faith 
through being sincere. As Valery - pointed out, this is the 
^e with Stendhal. Total, constant sincerity as a constant 
effort to adhere to oneself is by nature a constant effort to 
dissociate oneself from oneself. A person frees himself from 

irnself by the very act by which he makes himself an object 

or himself. To draw up a perpetual inventory of what one 



BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


110 

is means constantly to redeny oneself and to take refuge in 
a sphere where one is no longer anything but a pure, free 
regard. The goal of bad faith, as we said, is to put oneself 
out of reach; it is an escape. ISIow we see that we must use 
the same terms to define sincerity. What does this mean? 

In the final analysis the goal of sincerity and the goal of 
bad faith are not so difi[erent To be sure, there is a sin- 
cerity which bears on the past and which does not concern 
us here; I am sincere if I confess having had this pleasure 
or that intention. We shall see that if this sincerity is pos- 
sible, it is because in his fall into the past, the being of man 
is constituted as a being-in-itself. But here our concern is 
only with the sincerity which aims at itself in present im- 
manence. What is its goal? To bring me to confess to my- 
self what I am in order that I may finally coincide with my 
being; in a word, to cause myself to be, in the mode of the 
in-itself, what I am in the mode of “not being what I am.” 
Its assumption is that fundamentally I am already, in the 
mode of the in-itself, what I have to be. Thus we find at 
the base of sincerity a continual game of mirror and reflec- 
tion, a perpetual passage from the being which is what it is 
to the being which is not what it is and inversely from the 
being which is not what it is to the being which is what it 
is. And what is the goal of bad faith? To cause me to be 
what I am, in the mode of “not being what one is,” or not 
to be what I am in the mode of “being what one is.” We 
find here the same game of mirrors. In fact in order for me 
to have an intention of sincerity, I must at the outset simul- 
taneously be and not be what I am. Sincerity does not assign 
to me a mode of being or a particular quality, but in relation 
to that quality it aims at making me pass from one mode of 
being to another mode of being. This second mode of being, 
the ideal of sincerity, I am prevented by nature from attain- 
ing; and at the very moment when I struggle to attain it, 'I 
have a vague prejudicative comprehension that I shall not 
attain it. But all the same, in order for me to be able to con- 
ceive an intention^ in bad faith, I must have such a nature 
that within nay being I escape from my being. If I were sad 
OT cowardly in the way in which this inkwell is an inkwell, 
e possibility of bad faith could not even be conceived, 
should I be unable to escape from my being; I 
could not even imagine that I could escape from it. But if 
bad faith is possible by virtue of a simple project, it is be- 



BAD FAITH 


111 


cause so far as my being is concerned, there is no diJfference 
between being and non-being if I am cut off from my proj- 
ect. 

Bad faith is possible only because sincerity is conscious of 
'missing its goal inevitably, due to its very nature. I can try 
to apprehend myself as *‘not being cowardly,” when I am 
so, only on condition that the “being cowardly” is itself 
“in question” at the very moment when it exists, on condi- 
tion that it is itself one question, that at the very moment 
when I wish to apprehend it, it escapes me on all sides and 
annihilates itself. The condition imder which I can attempt 
an effort in bad faith is that in one sense, I am not this cow- 
ard which I do not wish to be. But if I were not cowardly 
' in the simple mode of not-being-what-one-is-not, I would 
be “in good faith” by declaring that I am not cowardly. 
Thus this inapprehensible coward is evanescent; in order 
for me not to be cowardly, I must in some way also be cow- 
ardly. That does not mean that I must be “a little” coward- 
ly, in the sense that “a little” signifies “to a certain degree 
cowardly — and not cowardly to a certain degree.” No. I 
must at once both be and not be totally and in all respects 
a coward. Thus in this case bad faith requires that I should 
not be what I am; that is, that there be an imponderable 
difference separating being from non-being in the mode of 
being of human reality. 

But bad faith is not restricted to denying the qualities 
which I possess, to not seeing the being which I am. It at- 
tempts also to constitute myself as being what I am not. It 
apprehends me positively as courageous when I am not so. 
And that is possible, once again, only if I am what I am not; 
that is, if non-being in me does not have being even as non- 
being. Of course necessarily I am not courageous; other- 
wise bad faith would not be bad faith. But in addition my 
effort in bad faith must include the ontological comprehen- 
sion that even in my usual being what I am, I am not it 
really and that there is no such difference between the being 
of “being-sad,” for example — ^which I am in the mode of 
not being what I am — and the “non-being” of not-being- 
courageous which I wish to hide from myself. Moreover it 
is particularly requisite that the very negation of being should 
be itself the object of a perpetual nihilation, that the very 
meaning of “non-being” be perpetually in question in hu- 
man reality. If I were not courageous in the way in which 



112 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

this inkwell is not a table; that is, if I were isolated in my 
cowardice, propped firmly against it, incapable of putting 
it in relation to its opposite, if I were not capable of de- 
termining myself as cowardly — that is, to deny courage to 
myself and thereby to escape my cowardice in the very mo- 
ment that I posit it — if it were not on principle impossible 
for me to coincide with my not-being-courageous as W'cll as 
with my being-courageous — then any project of bad faith 
would be prohibited me. Thus in order for bad faith to be 
possible, sincerity itself must be in bad faith. The condition 
of the possibility for bad faith is that human reality, in its 
most immediate being, in the intra-slructurc of the pre- 
reflective cogito, must be what it is not and not be what 
it is. 


m. THE “FAITH” OF BAD FAITH 

We have indicated for the moment only those conditions 
which render bad faith conceivable, the structures of being 
which permit us to form concepts of bad faith. We can not 
limit ourselves to these considerations; we have not yet dis- 
tin^ished bad faith from falsehood, The two-faced concepts 
which we have described would without a doubt be utilized 
by a liar to discountenance his questioner, although their 
two-faced quality being established on the being of man 
and not on some empirical circumstance, can and ought to 
be evident to all. The true problem of bad faith stems evi- 
dently from the fact that bad faith is faith. It can not be 
either a cynical lie or certainty — ^if certainty is the intuitive 
possession of the object. But if we take belief as meaning 
-the adherence of being to its object when the object is not 
given or is given indistinctly, then bad faith is belief; and 
the essential problem of bad faith is a problem of belief. 

How can we believe by bad faith in the concepts which 
we forge expressly to persuade ourselves? We' must note in 
fact that the project of bad faith must be itself in bad faith. 
I am not only in bad faith at the end of my effort when I 
have constructed my two-faced concepts and when I have 
persuaded myself. In truth, I have not persuaded myself; 
to the extent that I could be so persuaded, I have always 
been so. And at the very moment when I was disposed to 
put myself in bad faith, I of necessity was in bad faith with 
respec to this same disposition. For me to have represented 



BAD FAITH 


113 


it to myself as bad faith would have been cynicism; to be- 
lieve it sincerely innocent would have been in good faith. 
The decision to be in bad faith does not dare to speak its 
name; it believes itself and does not believe itself in bad 
faith; it believes itself and does not believe itself in good 
faith. It is this which, from the upsurge of bad faith, de- 
termines the later attitude and, as it were, the Welt- 
anschauung of bad faith. 

Bad faith does not hold the norms and criteria of truth 
as they are accepted by the critical thought of good faith. 
What it decides first, in fact, is the nature of truth. With 
bad faith a truth appears, a method of thinking, a type of 
being which is like that of objects; the ontological charac- 
teristic of the world of bad faith with which the subject 
suddenly surrounds himself is this: that here being is what 
it is noi and is not what it is. Consequently a peculiar type 
of evidence appears: non-persuasive evidence. Bad faith ap- 
prehends evidence but it is resigned in advance to not being 
fulfilled by this evidence, to not being persuaded and trans- 
formed into good faith. It makes itself humble and mod- 
est; it is not ignorant, it says, that faith is decision and that 
after each intuition, it must decide and will what it is. Thus 
bad faith in its primitive project and in its coming into the 
world decides on the exact nature of its requirements. It 
stands forth in the firm resolution not to demand too much, 
to count itself satisfied when it is barely persuaded, to force 
itself in decisions to adhere to uncertain truths. This orig- 
inal project of bad faith is a decision in bad faith on the 
nature of faith. Let us understand clearly that there is no 
question of a reflective, voluntary decision, but of a sponta- 
neous determination of om being. One puts oneself in bad 
faith as one goes to sleep and one is in bad faith as one 
dreams. Once this mode of being has been realized, it is as 
difiScult to get out of it as to wake oneself up; bad faith is 
a type of being in the world, like waking or dreaming, 
which by itself tends to perpetuate itself, although its struc- 
ture is of the metastable type. But bad faith is conscious of 
its structure, and it has taken precautions by deciding that 
the metastable structure is the structure of being and that 
non-persuasion is the structure of all convictions. It follows 
that if bad faith is faith and if it includes in its original 
project its own negation (it determines itself to be not quite 
convinced in order to convince itself that I am what I am 



BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


114 


not), then to start with, a faith which wishes itself to be 
not quite convinced must be possible. What are the condi- 
tions for the possibility of such a faith? 

I believe that my friend Pierre feels friendship for me. I 
believe it in good faith. I believe it but I do not have for 
it any self-evident intuition, for the nature of the object does 
not lend itself to intuition. I believe it; that is, I allow my- 
self to give in to all impulses to trust it; I decide to believe 
in it, and to maintain myself in this decision; I conduct my- 
self, finally, as if I were certain of it — and all this in the 
synthetic unity of one and the same attitude. This which I 
define as good faith is what Hegel would call the immediate. 
It is simple faith. Hegel would demonstrate at once that the 
immediate calls for mediation and that belief, by becoming 
belief for itself, passes to the state of non-belief. If I be- 


lieve that my friend Pierre likes me, this means that his 
friendship appears to me as the meaning of all his acts. Be- 
lief is a particular consciousness of the meaning of Pierre’s 
acts. But if I know that I believe, the belief appears to me as 
pure subjective determination .. without external correlative. 
This is what makes the very word “to believe” a term utilized 
indifferently to indicate the unwavering firmness of belief 
(“My God, I believe in you”) and its character as disarmed 
and strictly subjective (“Is Pierre my friend? I do not 
know; I believe so”). But the nature of consciousness is 
such that in it the mediate and the immediate are one and 


the same being. To believe is to know that one believes, and 
to ^ow that one believes is no longer to believe. Thus to 
believe is not to believe any longer because that is only to 
believe this in the unity of one and the same non-thetic 
self-consciousness. To be sure, we have here forced the de- 
scnption of the phenomenon by designating it with the 
word^ to know; non-thetic consciousness is not to know. 
But It is in its very translucency at the origin of all know- 
ing. Thus the non-thetic consciousness (of) believing is de- 
s rue ive of belief. But at the same time the very law of the 

implies that the being of believing ought 
to be the consciousness of believing. 

which questions its own being, 
", ■'if f®- <iestruotion, which can 

for wSch It ^ 

To believp 5 ^ to and to appear is to deny itself, 

10 beheve ,s not-to-bcheve. We see the reason for it; the 



BAD FAITH 


115 


being of consciousness is to exist by itself, then to make 
itself be and thereby to pass beyond itself. In this sense con- 
sciousness is perpetually escaping itself, belief becomes non- 
belief, the immediate becomes mediation, the absolute be- 
comes relative, and the relative becomes absolute. The ideal 
of good faith (to believe what one believes) is, like that of 
sincerity (to be what one is), an ideal of being-in-itself. 
Every belief is a belief that falls short; one never wholly be- 
lieves what' one believes. Consequently the primitive project 
of bad faith is only the utilization of this self-destruction 
of the fact of consciousness. If every belief in good faith is 
an impossible belief, then there is a place for every impos- 
sible belief. My inability to believe that I am courageous 
will not discourage me since every belief involves not quite 
believing. I shall define this impossible belief as my belief. 
To be sure, I shall not be able to hide from myself that I 
believe in order not to believe and that I do not believe 
in order to believe. But the subtle, total annihilation of bad 
faith fay itself can not surprise me; it exists at the basis of 
all faith. 'What is it then? At the moment when I wish to 
believe myself courageous I know that I am a coward. And 
this certainly would come to destroy my belief. But first, 
I am not any more courageous than cowardly, if we are to 
understand this in the mode of being of the in-itself. In 
the second place, I do not know that I am courageous; such 
a view of myself can be accompanied only by belief, for it 
surpasses pure reflective certitude. In the third place, it is 
very true that bad faith does not succeed in believing what 
it wishes to believe. But it is precisely as the acceptance of 
not believing what it believes that it is bad faith. Good faith 
wishes to flee the “not-believing-what-one-believes” by find- 
ing refuge in being. Bad faith flees being by taking refuge 
in “not-believing-what-one-believes.” It has disarmed all be- 
liefs in advance — ^those which it would like to take hold of 
and, by the same stroke, the others, those which it wishes to 
flee. In willing this self-destruction of belief, from which 
science escapes by searching for evidence, it ruins the beliefs 
which are opposed to it, which reveal themselves as being 
only belief. Thus we can better understand the original phe- 
nomenon of bad faith- 

In bad faith there is no cynical lie nor knowing prepara- 
tion for deceitful concepts. But the first act of bad faith is 
to flee what it can not flee,.^toJBee what it is. The very- ~ 



116 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


ect of flight reveals to bad faith an inner disintegration in 
the heart of being, and it is this disintegration which bad 
faith wishes to be. In truth, the two immediate attitudes 
which we can take in the face of our being are conditioned 
by the very nature of this being and its immediate relation 
with the in-itself. Good faith seeks to flee the inner disinte- 
gration of my being in the direction of the in-itself which 
it should be and is not. Bad faith seeks to flee the in-itself by 
means of the inner disintegration of my being. But it denies 
this very disintegration as it denies that it is itself bad faith. 
Bad faith seeks by means of “not-being-what-one-is” to es- 
cape from the in-itself which I am not in the mode of being 
what one is not. It denies itself as bad faith and aims at the 
in-itself which I am not in the mode of “not-being-what- 
one-is-not.”® If bad faith is possible, it is because it is an 
immediate, permanent threat to every project of the human 
being; it is because consciousness conceals in its being a per- 
manent risk of bad faith. The origin of this risk is the fact 
that the nature of consciousness simultaneously is to be what 
it is not and not to be what it is. In the light of these re- 
marks we can now approach the ontological study of con- 
sciousness, not as the totality of the human being, but as 
the instantaneous nucleus of this being. 

9 K it is indifferent whether one is in good or in bad faith, because 
bad faith reapprehends good faith and slides to the very origin of the 
project of good faith, that does not mean that we can not radically escape 
bad faith. But this supposes a self-recovery of being which was previously 
corrupted. This self-recovery we shall call authenticity, the description of 
which has no place here. 



PART TWO 




CHAPTER ONE 


Immediate Stractures 
of the For-Itself 


I. PRESENCE TO SELF 

Negation has referred us to freedom, freedom to bad faith, 
and bad faith to the being of consciousness, whicb is the req- 
uisite condition for the possibility of bad faith. In the light 
of the requirements which we have established in the preced- 
ing chapters, we must now resume the description which we 
attempted in the Introduction of this work; that is, we must 
return to the plane of the pre-reflective cogito. Now the 
cogito never gives out anything other than what we 
ask of it. Descartes questioned it concerning its functional 
^£ct — “I doubt, 1 think” And because he wished to pass 
without a conducting thread from this functional aspect to 
existential dialectic, he fell into the error of substance. 
Husserl, warned by this error, remained timidly on the plane 
of functional description. Due to this fact he never passed 
beyond the pure description of the appearance as such; he 
n^ shut himself up inside the cogito and deserves — ^in spite 
of his denial — ’to be called a phenomenalist rather than a 
Phenomenologist His phenomenalism at every moment bor- 
ers on Kantian idealism. Heidegger, wishing to avoid that 
os^ptive phenomenalism which leads to the Megarian, 
auhdidectic isolation of essences, begins with the existential 
® yhc without going through the cogito. But since the 
^£in has from the start been deprived of the dimension of 


119 



1 

120 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


consciousness, it can never regain this dimension. Heidegger 1 
endows human reality with a self-understanding which he 
defines as an “ekstatic pro-ject” of its own possibilities. It' is ; 
certainly not my intention to deny the existence of this proj- ' 
ect. But how could there be an understanding which would 
not in itself be the consciousness (of) being understanding? ’ 
This ekstatic character of human reality will lapse into a thing- 
like, blind in-itself unless it arises from the consciousness of ' 
ekstasis. In truth the cogito must be our point of departure, 
but we can say of it, parodying a famous saying, that it leads 
us only on condition that we get out of it. Our preceding ' 
study, which concerned the conditions for the possibility of i 
certain types of conduct, had as its goal only to place us in a | 
position to question the cogito about its being and to furnish ] 
us with the dialectic instrument which would enable us to find ' 
in the cogito itself the means of escaping from instantaneity | 
toward the totality of being which constitutes human reality. 
Let us return now to description of non-thetic self-conscious- 
ness; let us examine its results and ask what it means for con- 
sciousness that it must necessarily be what it is not and not be 
what it is. 

“The being of consciousness,” we said in the Introduc- ; 


tion, “is a being such that in its being, its being is in ques- 
tion.” This means that the being of consciousness does not 
coincide with itself in a full equivalence. Such equivalence, 
which is that of the in-itself, is expressed by this simple for- 
mula; being is what it is. In the in-itself there is not a particle 
/of being which is not wholly within itself without distance. 
When being is thus conceived there is not the slightest sus- 
picion of duality in it; this is what we mean when we say that 
the density of being of the in-itself is infinite. It is a fullness. 
The principle of identity can be said to be synthetic not only 
because it limits its scope to a region of definite being, but in 
particular because it masses within it the infinity of density. 

that A exists in an infinite compression with 
an infinite density. Identity is the limiting concept of unifica- 
tion. it IS not true that the in-itself has any need of a synthetic 
uni cation of its being; at its own extreme limit, unity disap- 
pears and passes into identity. Identity is the ideal of “one,” 
and one conies into the world by human reality. The in- 

^ plenitude can be 

gmed, no more perfect equivalence of content to contain- 


IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 121 

er. There is not the slightest emptiness in being, not the tiniest 
crack through which nothingness might slip in. 

The distinguishing characteristic of consciousness, on the 
other hand, is that it is a decompression of being. Indeed 
it is impossible to define it as coincidence with itself. Of this 
table I can say only that it is purely and simply this table. But 
I can not limit myself to saying that my belief is belief; my 
belief is the consciousness (of) belief. It is often said that the 
act of reflection alters the fact of consciousness on which it is 
directed. Husserl himself admits that the fact “of being seen” 
involves a total modification for each ErJebnis. But I believe 
that I have demonstrated that the first condition of all reflec- 
tion is a pre-reflective cogito. This cogito, to be sure, does not 
posit an object; it remains within consciousness. But it is none- 
theless homologous with the reflective cogito since it appears 
as the first necessity for non-reflective consciousness to be seen 
by itself. Originally then the cogito includes this nullifying 
characteristic of existing for a witness, although the witness 
for which consciousness exists is itself. Thus by the sole fact 
that my belief is apprehended as belief, it is no longer only 
belief; that is, it is already no longer belief, it is troubled 
belief. Thus the ontological judgment “belief is conscious- 
ness (of) belief” can under no circumstances be taken as a 
statement of identity; the subject and the attribute are rad- 
ically different though still within the indissoluble unity of 
one and the same being. 

Very well, someone will say, but at least must say that 
consciousness (of) belief is consciousness (of) belief. We 
rediscover identity and the in-itself on this level. It was only 
a matter of choosing the appropriate plane on which we 
should apprehend our object. But that is not true: to afiirm 
that the consciousness (of) belief is consciousness (of) belief 
is to dissociate consciousness from belief, to suppress the pa- 
renthesis, and to make belief an object for consciousness; it is 
to launch abruptly on to the plane of reflectivity. A conscious- 
ness (of) belief which would be only consciousness (of) be- 
lief W'ould in fact have to assume consciousness (of) itself as 
consciousness (of) belief. Belief would become a pure tran- 
scending and noematic qualification of consciousness: con- 
sciousness would be free to determine itself as it pleased in 
the face of that belief. It would resemble that impassive re- 
gard which, according to Victor Cousin, consciousness casts 



122 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

on psychic phenomena in order to elucidate them one by one. 
But the analysis of methodological doubt which Husserl at- 
tempted has clearly shown the fact that only rcdcctivc con- 
sciousness can be dissociated from what is posited by the 
consciousness reflected-on. It is on the reflective level only 
that we can attempt an a putting between parenthe- 

ses, only there that we can refuse what Husserl calls the mit- 
machen.^ The consciousness (of) belief, while irreparably 
altering belief, does not distinguish itself from belief; it exists 
in order to perform the act of faith. Thus wc arc obliged to 
admit that the consciousness (of) belief is belief. At its 
origin we have apprehended this double game of reference: 
consciousness (of) belief is belief and belief is consciousness 
(of) belief. On no account can we say that consciousness is 
consciousness or that belief is belief. Each of the terms refers 
to the other and passes into the other, and yet each term is 
different from the other. We have seen that neither belief .-nor 
pleasure nor joy can exist before being conscious; conscious- 
ness is the measure of their being; yet it is no less true that 
belief, owing to the very fact that it can exist only as troubled, 
exists from the start as escaping itself, as shattering the unity 
of all the concepts in which one can wish to inclose it. 

Thus consciousness (of) belief and belief are one and the 
same being, the characteristic of which is absolute im- 
manence. But as soon as we wish to grasp this being, it slips 
between our fingers, and we find ourselves faced with a pat- 
tern of duality, with a game of reflections. For consciousness 
is a reflection {reflet), but qua reflection it is exactly the 
one reflecting {reflechissant) , and if we attempt to grasp it as 
reflecting, it vanishes and we fall back on the reflection. Tliis 
Structure of- the reflection-reflecting {reflet-refletant) has 
disconcerted philosophers, who have wanted to explain it by 
an appeal to infinity — either by positing it as an idca-idcae 
as Spinoza did, who calls it an idea-ideae-ideae, etc., or by 
defining it in the manner of Hegel as a return upon itself, as 
the veritable infinite. But the introduction of infinity into 
consciousness, aside from the fact that it fixes the phenom- 
enon and obscures it, is only an explicative theory' expressly 
designed to reduce the being of consciousness to that of the 
in-itself. Yet if We accept the objective existence of the re- 
flection-reflecting as it is given, we are obliged to conceive 

iTr. Correction for an obvious misprint. 

2Tr. "To take part in,” “to participate.” 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF'THE FOR-ITSELF 123 

a mode of being different from that of the in-itself , not a unity 
which contains a duality, not a synthesis which surpasses and 
lifts the abstract moments of the thesis and of the antithesis, 
but a duality which is unity, a reflection (reflet) which is its 
own reflecting (reflection). In fact if we seek to lay hold on 
the total phenomenon (i.e., the unity of this duality or con- 
sciousness (of) belief), we are referred immediately to one of 
the terms, and this term in turn refers us to the unitary or- 
ganization of immanence. But if on the contrary we wish to 
take our point of departure from duality as such and to posit 
consciousness and belief as a dyad, then we encounter the 
idea-ideae of Spinoza and we miss the pre-reflective phenom- 
enon which we wished to study. This is because pre-reflective 
consciousness is self-consciousness. It is this same notion of 
self which must be studied, for it defines the very being of 
consciousness.-' 

Let us note first that the term in-itself, which we have 
borrowed from tradition to designate the transcending 
being, is inaccurate. At the limit of coincidence with itself, 
m fact, the self vanishes to give place to identical being. The 
self can not be a property of being-in-itself. By nature it is a 
reflejdve, as syntax suflaciently indicates — in particular the 
logical rigor of Latin syntax with the strict distinctions im- 
posed by grammar between the uses of efus and sui. The self 
refers, but it refers precisely to the subject. It indicates a re- 
lation between the subject and himself, and this relation is 
precisely a duality, but a particular duality since it requires 
particular verbal symbols. But on the other hand, the self does 
not designate being either as subject or as predicate. If indeed 
I consider the "se" in “i7 s’ennuie,”^ for example, I establish 
that it opens up to allow the subject himself to appear behind 
it. It is not the subject, since the subject without relation to 
himself would be condensed into the identity of the in-itself; 
neither is it a consistent articulation of the real, since it allows 
the subject to appear behind it. In fact the self cannot be ap- 
.nrehended as a real existent; the subject can not be self, for 
coincidence with self, as we have seen, causes the seff to 
disappear. But neither can it not be itself since the self is an 
mdication of the subject himself. The self therefore repre- 
sents an ideal distance within the immanence of the subject 

Tr. Literally the “self” in “he bores himself” s’ennuie), a familiar 
construction in the many French jefleiave verbs. Cf. English “he washes 
hunself,” 



124 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

in relation to himself, a way of not being his own coincidence, 
of escaping identity while positing it as unity ^in short, of 
being in a perpetually unstable equilibrium between identity 
as absolute cohesion without a, trace of diversity and unity 
as a synthesis of multiplicity. This is what we shall call pres- 
ence to itself. The law of being of the for-itself, as the on- 
tological foundation of consciousness, is, to be itself in the 
form of presence to itself. 

This presence to itself has often been taken for a pleni- 
tude of existence, and a strong prejudice prevalent among 
philosophers causes them to attribute to consciousness the 
highest rank in being. But this postulate can not be main- 
tained after a more thorough description of the notion of pres- 
ence, Actually presence to always implies duality, at least a 
virtual separation. The presence of being to itself implies a 
detachment on the part of being in relation to itself. The 
coincidence of identity is the veritable plenitude of being 
exactly because in this coincidence there is left no place for 
any negativity. Of course the principle of identity can in- 
volve the principle of non-contradiction as Hegel has observed. 
The being which is what it is must be able to be the being 
which is not what it is not. But in the first place this negation, 
like all others, comes to the surface of being through human 
reality, as we have shown, and not through a dialectic appro- 
priate just to being. In addition this principle can denote 
only the relations of being with the external, exactly because it 
presides over the relations of being with what it is not. We 
are dealing then with a principle constitutive of external rela- 
tions such that they can appear to a human reality present to 
being-in-itself and engaged in the world. This principle does 
not concern the internal relations of being; these relations, 
inasnauch as they would posit an otherness, do not exist. The 
principle of identity is the negation of every species of rela- 
tion at the heart of being-in-itself. 

Presence to self, on the contrary, supposes that an im- 
palpable fissure has slipped into being If being is present to 
itself, it is because it is not wholly itself. Presence is an 
immediate deterioration of coincidence, for it supposes separa- 
tion. But if we ask ourselves at this point what it is which 
separates the subject from himself, we are forced to admit 
that it is nothing. Ordinarily what separates is a distance in 
space, a lapse of time, a psychological difference, or simply 
the mdividuality of two .uo-presents— in short, a qualified 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 125 

reality. But in the case which concerns us, nothing can sepa- 
rate the consciousness (of) belief from belief, since belief is 
nothing other than the consciousness (of) belief. To introduce 
into the unity of a pre-reflective cogito a qualified element 
external to this cogito would be to shatter its unity, to destroy 
its translucency; there would then be in consciousness some- 
thing of wliich it would not be conscious and which would 
not exist in itself as consciousness. The separation which sep- 
arates belief from itself can not be grasped or even conceived 
in isolation. If we seek to reveal it, it vanishes. We find belief 
once more as pure immanence. But if, on the other hand, we 
wish to apprehend belief as such, then the fissure is there, 
appearing when we do not wish to see it, disappearing as soon 
as we seek to contemplate it. This fissure then is the pure 
negative. Distance, lapse of time, psychological difference 
can be apprehended in themselves and include as such ele- 
ments of positivity; they have a simple negative function. But 
the fissure within consciousness is a nothing except for the 
fact that it denies and that it can have being only as we 
do not see it. 

This negative which is the nothingness of being and the 
nihilating power both together, is nothingness. Nowhere else 
can we grasp it in such purity. Everywhere else in one way or 
another we must confer on it being-in-itself as nothingness. 
But the nothingness which arises in the heart of consciousness 
is not. It is made-to-be. Belief, for example, is not the con- 
tiguity of one being with another being; it is its own pres- 
ence to itself, its own decompression of being. Otherwise the 
unity of the for-itself would dissolve into the duality of two 
in-itselfs.'* Thus the for-itself must be its own nothingness. 
The being of consciousness qua consciousness is to exist 
at a distance from itself as a presence to itself, and this empty 
distance which being carries in its being is Nothingness. Thus 
in order for a self to exist, it is necessary that the unity of this 
being include its own nothingness as the nihilation of iden- 
tity. For the nothingness which slips into belief is its 
nothingness, the nothingness of belief as belief in itself, 
as belief blind and full, as “simple faith.” The for-itself is 

■‘Tr. Deux en-soi. Ungrammatical as the expression “in-itselfs” admittedly 
it sepms to me the most accurate translation. “In-themselves” would 
have a different meaning, for it would suggest a unity of two examples 
of being-in-itself, and Sartre’s point here is their duality and isolation 
from each other. 



126 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


the being which determines itself to exist inasmuch as it can 
not coincide with itself. 

Hence we understand how it was that by questioning the 
pre-reflective cogito without any conducting thread, we could 
not find nothingness anywhere. One does not iind, one does 
not disclose nothingness in the manner in which one can 
find, disclose a being. Nothingness is always an elsewhere. It 
is the obligation for the for-itself never to exist except in the 
form of an elsewhere in relation to itself, to exist as a being 
which perpetually effects in itself a break in being. This break 
does not refer us elsewhere to another being; it is only a 
perpetual reference of self to self, of the reflection to the 
reflecting, of the reflecting to the reflection. This refer- 
ence, however, does not provoke an infinite movement in 
the heart of the for-itself but is given within the unity of a 
single act. The infinite movement belongs only to the reflec- 
tive regard which wants to apprehend the phenomenon as a 
totality and which is referred from the reflection to the re- 
flecting, from the reflecting to the reflection without being 
able to stop. Thus nothingness is this hole in being, this fall 
of the in-itself toward the self, the fall by which the for-itself 
is constituted. But this nothingness can only “be made-to-be” 
if its borrowed' existence is correlative with a nihilating act 
on the part of being. This perpetual act by which the in-itself 
degenerates into presence to itself we shall call an ontological 
act. Nothingness is the putting into question of being by 
being — ^that is, precisely consciousness or for-self. It is an 
absolute event which comes to being by means of being and 
which, without having being, is perpetually sustained by 
being. Since being-in-itself is isolated in its being by its 
total positivity no being can produce being and nothing can 
happen to being through being — except for nothingness. 
Nothingness is the peculiar possibility of being and its unique 
possibility. Yet this original possibility appears only in the 
absolute act which realizes it. Since nothingness is nothingness 
of being, it can come to being only through being itself. Of 
course it comes to being through a particular being, which is 
human reality. But this being is constituted as human reality 
inasmuch as this being is nothing but the original project of 
its own nothingness. Human reality is being in so far as 
within its being and for its being it is the unique foundation 
of nothingness at the heart of being. 


IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 127 


n. THE FACTICITY of the FOR-ITSELF 

Yet the for-itself is. It is, we may say, even if it is a being 
which is not what it is and which is what it is not. It is 
since whatever reefs there may be to cause it to founder, still 
the project of sincerity is at least conceivable. The for-itself is, 
in the manner of an event, in the sense in which I can say 
that Philip II has been, that my friend Pierre is or exists. 
The for-itself is, in so far as it appears in a condition which 
it has not chosen, as Pierre is a French bourgeois in 1942, as 
Schmitt was a Berlin worker in 1870; it is in so far as it is 
thrown into a world and abandoned in a “situation”; it is as 
pure contingency inasmuch as for it as for things in the world, 
as for this wall, this tree, this cup, the original question can 
be posited: “Why is this being exactly such and not other- 
wise?” It is in so far as there is in it something of which it is 
^ not the foundation — its presence to the world. 

Being apprehends itself as not being its own foundation, 
and this apprehension is at the basis of every cogito. In this 
connection it is to be noted that it reveals itself immediately 
to the reflective cogito of Descartes. When Descartes wants to 
profit from this revelation, he apprehends himself as an im- 
perfect being “since he doubts.” But in this imperfect being, 
he establishes the presence of the idea of perfection. He ap- 
prehends then a cleavage between the type of being which he 
can conceive and the being which he is. It is this cleavage or 
lack of being which is at the origin of the second proof of 
the existence of God. In fact if we get rid of the scholastic 
terminology, what remains of this proof? The very clear in- 
dication that the being which possesses in itself the idea of 
perfection can not be its own foundation, for if it were, it 
would have produced itself in conformance with that idea. In 
other words, a being which would be. its own foundation could 
not suffer the slightest discrepancy between what it is and 
what it conceives, for it would produce itself in conformance 
with its comprehension of being and could conceive only of 
what it is. 

But this apprehension of being as a lack of being in the 
face of being is first a comprehension on the part of the cogito 
of its own contingency. I think, therefore I am. What am I? 
A being which is not its own foundation, which qua being, 
could be other than it is to the extent that it does not account 



128 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


for its being. This is that first intuition of our own contin- 
gency which Heidegger gives as the first motivation for the 
passage from the un-authentic to the authentic.® There is rest- 
lessness, an appeal to the conscience (Ruf des Gewissens), a 
feeling of guilt. In truth Heidegger’s description shows all too 
clearly his anxiety to establish an ontological foundation for 
an Ethics with which he claims not to be concerned, as also 
to reconcile his humanism with the religious sense of the 
transcendent. The intuition of our contingency is not identical 
with a feeling of guilt. Nevertheless it is true that in our own 
apprehension of ourselves, we appear to ourselves as having 
the character of an injustifiable fact. 

Earlier, however, we apprehended ourselves as conscious- , 
ness — ^that is, as a “being which exists by itself.”® How with- 
in the unity of one and the same upsurge into being, can we 
be that being which exists by itself as not being the foundation 
of its being? Or in other words, , since the for-itself — in so far 
as it is — is not its own being (i.e., is not the foundation of it) , 
how can it as for-itself, be the foundation of its own nothing- 
ness? The answer is in the question. 

While being is indeed the foundation of nothingness 
as the nihilation of its own being, that is not the same as 
saying that it is the foundation of its being. To found its own 
being it would have to exist at a distance from itself, and 
that would imply a certain nihilation of the being founded 
as of the being which founds — a duality which would .be 
unity; here we should fall back into the case of the for-itself. 
In short, every effort to conceive of the idea of a being which 
would be the foundation of its being results inevitably in 
forming that of a being which, contingent as being-inritself, 
would be the foundation of its own nothingness. The act of 
causation by which God is causa sui is a nihilating act 
like every recovery of the self by the self, to the same degree 
that the original relation of necessity is a return to self, a re- 
flexivity. This original necessity in turn appears on the foun- 
dation of a contingent being, precisely that being which is 
in order to be the cause of itself. Leibniz’ effort to define 
necessity in terms of possibility — a definition taken up again 
by Kant ^is undertaken from the point of view of knowledge 


®Tr. I have corrected what must surely be a misprint. “ 

authentic to the authentic,” as the text actually reads, would 
sense. 

® Cf. Introduction, Section III. 


From the 
make no 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 129 


and not from the point of view of being. The passage from 
possibility to being such as Leibniz conceives it (the 
necessary is a being whose possibility implies its existence) 
marks the passage from our ignorance to knowledge. In fact 
since possibility precedes existence, it can be possibility only 
with respect to our thought. It is an external possibility in 
relation to the being whose possibility it is, since being 
unrolls from it like a consequence from a principle. But we 
pointed out earlier that the notion of possibility could be con- 
sidered in two aspects. We can make of it a subjective indica- 
tion. The statement, “It is possible that Pierre is dead,” indi- 
cates that I am in ignorance concerning Pierre’s fate, and in 
this case it is a witness who decides the possible in the 
presence of the world. Being has its possibility outside of it- 
self in the pure regard which gauges its chances of being; 
possibility can indeed be given to us before being; but it is to 
us that it is given and it is in no way the possibility of this 
being. The billiard ball which rolls on the table does not 
possess the possibility of being turned from its path by a fold 
in the cloth; neither does the possibility of deviation belong 
to the cloth; it can be established only by a witness syntheti- 
cally as an external relation. But possibility can also appear 
to us as an ontological structure of the real. Then it belongs 
to certain beings as their possibility; it is the possibility which 
‘they are, which they have to be. In this case being sustains its 
own possibilities in being; it is their foundation, and the 
necessity of being can not then be derived from its possibility. 
In a word, God, if he exists, is contingent. 

Thus the being of consciousness, since this being is in 
itself in order to nihilate itself in for-itself, remains contin- 
gent; that is, it is not the role of consciousness either to give 
being to itself or to receive it from others. In addition to the 
fact that the ontological proof like the cosmological proof 
fails to establish a necessary being, the explanation and the 
foundation- of my being — ^in so far as I am a particular 
being — can not be sought in necessary being. The premises. 
Everything which is contingent must find a foundation in a 
necessary being. Now I am contingent,” mark a desire to 
find a foundation and do not furnish the explicative link with 
a real foundation. Such premises could not in any way ac- 
count for this contingency but only for the abstract idea of 
contingency in general. Furthermore the question here is one 



130 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

of value, not factj But v^'hile being in-itself is contingent, it 
recovers itself by falling into for-itsclf. It is, in order to 
lose itself in a for-itself. In a word being is and can^ only 
be. But the peculiar possibility of being — that which is re- 
vealed in the nihilating act — is of being the foundation of 
itself as consciousness through the sacrificial act which nihi- 
lates being. The for-itself is the in-itself losing itself as in-itsclf 
in order to found itself as consciousness. Thus consciousness 
holds within itself its own being-as-consciousness, and since 
it is its own nihilation, it can refer only to itself; but that 
which is annihilated^ in consciousness — though we can not call 
it the foundation of consciousness — is the contingent in-itscif. 
The in-itself can not provide the foundation for anything; if it 
founds itself, it does so by giving itself the modification 
of the for-itself. It is the foundation of itself in so far as it is 
already no longer in-itself, and we encounter here again the 
origin of every foundation. If being in-itself can be neither its 
own foundation nor that of other beings, the whole idea of 
foundation- comes into the world through the for-itself. It is 
not only that the for-itself as a nihilated in-itself is itself given 
a foundation, but with it foundation appears for the first time. 

It follows that this in-itself, engulfed and nihilated in the 
absolute event which is the appearance of the foundation or 
upsurge of the for-itself, remains at the heart of the for-itself 
as its original contingency. Consciousness is its own founda- 
tion but it remains contingent in order that there may be a 
consciousness rather than an infinity of pure and simple in- 
itself. The absolute event or for-itself is contingent in its 
very being. If I decipher the givens of the pre-reflective 
cogito, I establish, to be sure, that the for-itself 'refers to 
itself. Whatever the for-itself may be, it is this in the mode 
of consciousness of being. Thirst refers to the consciousness 
of thirst, which it is, as to its foundation — and conversely. 
But the totality “reflected-reflecting,” if it could be given, 
would be contingency and in-itself. But this totality can not 
be attained, since I can not say either that the consciousness 
of thirst is consciousness of thirst, or that thirst is thirst. It 
is there as a nihilated totality, as the evanescent unity of the 
phenomenon. If I apprehend the phenomenon as plurality, 
this plurality indicates itself as a total unity, and hence its 

reasoning indeed is explicitly based on the exigencies of reason. 
«• “annihilated” here.^but I feel that he must have meant 

nihilated since he has told us earher that being can not be annihilated. 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 131 


meaning is its contingency. That is, I can ask myself, “Why 
am I thirsty? Why am I conscious of this glass? Of this. 
Me?” But as soon as I consider this totality in in^self, it 
nihilates itself under my regard. It is not; it is in order not 
to be, and I return to the f or-itself apprehended in its sugges- 
tion of duality as the foundation of itself. I am angry because 
I produce myself as consciousness of anger. Suppress this 
self-causation which constitutes the being of the for-itself, and 
you will no longer find anything, not even “anger-in-itself”; 
for anger exists by nature as for-itself. Thus the for-itself is 
sustained by a perpetual contingency for which it assumes 
the responsibility and which it assimilates without ever being 
able to suppress it. This perpetually evanescent contingency 
of the in-itself which, without ever allowing itself to be appre- 
hended, haunts the for-itself and reattaches it to being-in-itself 
— this contingency is what we shall call the facticity 
of the for-itself. It is this facticity which permits us to say 
that the for-itself is, that it exists, although we can never 
realize the facticity, and although we always apprehend it 
through the for-itself. 

We indicated earlier that we can be nothing without play- 
ing at being.® “If I am a cafe waiter,” we said, “this can be 
only in the mode of not being one.” And that is true. If I 
could be a cafe waiter, I should suddenly constitute myself as 
a contingent block of identity. And that I am not. This con- 
tingent being in-itself always escapes me. But in order that 
I may freely give a meaning to the obligations which my 
state involves, then in one sense at the heart of the for-itself, 
as a perpetually evanescent totality, being-in-itself must be 
given as the evanescent contingency of my situation. This is 
the result of the fact that while I must play at being a cafe 
waiter in order to be one, stUl it would be in vain for me to 
play at being a diplomat or a sailor, for I would not be one. 
Ihis inapprehensible fact of my condition, this impalpable 
difference which distinguishes this drama of realization from 
drama pure and simple is what causes the for-itself, while 
choosing the meaning of its situation arid while constituting' 
Uself as the foundation of itself in situation, not to choose 
Its position. This part of my condition is what causes me to 
^pprehend myself simultaneously as totally responsible for my 
oemg-— inasmuch as I am its foundation — and yet as totally 
unjustifiable. Without facticity consciousness could choose its 

* Part One, Chapter Two, Section II. ~ 


132 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

attachments to the world in the same way as the souls in Plato’s 
Republic choose their condition. I could determine myself 
to “be born a worker” or to “be born a bourgeois.” But on 
the other hand facticity can not constitute me as being a 
bourgeois or being a worker. It is not even strictly speaking 
a resistance of fact since it is only by recovering it in the sub- 
structure of the pre-refiective cogito that I confer on it its 
meaning and its resistance. Facticity is only one indication 
which I give myself of the being to which I must reunite 
myself in order to be what I am. 

It is impossible to grasp facticity in its brute nudity, since 
all that we will find of it is already recovered and freely 
constructed. The simple fact “of being there,” at that table, 
in that chair is already the pure object of a limiting-concept 
and as such can not be grasped. Yet it is contained in my 
“consciousness of being-there,” as its full contingency, as the 
nihilated in-itself on the basis of which the for-itself produces 
itself as consciousness of being there. The for-itself looking 
deep into itself as the consciousness of being there will never 
discover anything in itself but motivations; that is, it will be 
perpetually referred to itself and to its constant freedom. (I 
am there in order to . . . etc.) But the contingency which 
paralyzes these motivations to the same degree as they totally 
found themselves is the facticity of the for-itself. The relation 
of the for-itself, which is its own foundation qua for-itself, 
to facticity can be correctly termed a factual necessity. It is 
indeed this factual necessity which Descartes and Husserl 
seized upon as constituting the evidence of the cogito. 
The for-itself is necessary in so far as it provides its own 
foundation. And this is why it is the object reflected by an 
apodictic intuition. I can not doubt that I am. But in so far 
as this for-itself as such could also not be, it has all the con- 
tingency of fact. Just as my nihilating freedom is apprehended 
in anguish, so the for-itself is conscious of its facticity. It has 
the feeling of its complete gratuity; it apprehends itself as 
being there for nothing, as being de trop. 

We must not confuse facticity with that Cartesian substance 
whose attribute ^ is thought. To be sure, thinking substance 
existe only as it thinks; and since it is a created thing, it 
participates in the contingency of the ens creatum. But it is. 
t preserves the character of being-in-itself in its integrity, 
t ough Ae for-itself is its attribute. This is what is called 
Descartes substantialist illusion. For us, on the other 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 133 


hand, the appearance of the for-itself or absolute event refers 
indeed to the effort of an in-itself to found itself; it cor- 
responds to an attempt on the part of being to remove con- 
tingency from its being. But this attempt results in the nihha- 
tion of the in-itself, because the in-itself can not found itself 
without introducing the self or a reflective, nihilating refer- 
ence into the absolute identity of its being and consequently 
degenerating into for-itself. The for-itself corresponds then to 
an expanding de-structuring of the in-itself, and the in-itself 
is nihilated and absorbed in its attempt to found itself. Fac- 
ticity is not then a substance of which the for-itself would be 
the attribute and which would produce thought without ex- 
hausting itself in that very production. It simply resides in 
the for-itself as a memory of being, as its unjustifiable pres- 
ence in the world. Being-in-itself can found its nothingness 
but not its being. In its decompression it nihUates itself in a 
for-itself which becomes qua for-itself its own foundation; 
but the contingency which the for-itself has derived from the 
in-itself remains out of reach. It' is what remains of the in-it- 
self in the for-itself as facticity and what causes the for-itself 
to have only a factual necessity; that is, it is the foundation 
of its consciousness-of -being or existence, but on no account 
can it found its presence. Thus consciousness can in no case 
prevent itself from being and yet it is totally responsible for its 
being. 


m. THE FOR-ITSELF AND THE BEING 
OF VALUE 

Any study of human reality must begin with the cogito. But 
the Cartesian “I think” is conceived in the instantaneous per- 
spective of temporality. Can we find in the heart of the cogi- 
to a way of transcending this instantaneity? If human reality 
Were limited to the being of the “I think,” it would have 
^y the truth of an instant. And it is indeed true that with 
Descartes -the cogito is an instantaneous totality, since by 
Itself it makes no claim on the future and since an act of 
continuous “creation” is necessary to make it pass from one 
instant to another. But can we even conceive of the truth of 
nn instant? Does the cogito not in its own way engage both 
future? Heidegger is so persuaded that the “I think” 
0 Husserl is a trap for larks, fascinating and ensnaring, 



134 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

that he has completely avoided any appeal to consciousness in 
his description of Dasein, His goal is to show it immediately 
as care; that is, as escaping itself in the projecting of self to- 
ward the possibilities which it is. It is this project of the self 
outside the self which he calls “understanding” (Verstand) 
and which permits him to establish human reality as being a 
“revealing-revealed.” But this attempt to show first the 
escape from self of the Dasein is going to encounter in turn 
insurmountable difficulties; we cannot first suppress the di- 
mension “consciousness,” not even if it is in order to re-estab- 
lish it subsequently. Understanding has meaning only if it is 
consciousness of understanding. My possibility can exist as my 
possibility only if it is my consciousness which escapes itself 
toward my possibility. Otherwise the whole system of being 
and its possibilities will fall into the unconscious — that is into 
the in-itself. Behold, we are thrown back again toward the 
cogito. We must make this our point of departure. Can we 
extend it without losing the benefits of reflective evidence? 
What has the description of the for-itself revealed to us? 

First we have encountered a nihilation in which the being 
of the for-itself is affected in its being. This revelation of 
nothingness did not seem to us to pass beyond the limits of 
the cogito. But let us consider more closely. 

The for-itself can not sustain nihilation without deter- 
mining itself as a lack of being. This means that the nihila- 
tion does not coincide with a simple introduction of emptiness 
into consciousness. An external being has not expelled the 
in-itself from consciousness; rather the for-itself is perpetually 
determining itself not to be the in-itself. This means that it can 
establish itself only in terms of the in-itself and against the 
in-itself. Thus since the nihilation is the nihilation of being, 
it represents the original connection between the being of the 
for-itself and the being of the in-itself. The concrete, real in- 
itself is wholly present to the heart of consciousness as that 
which consciousness determines itself not to be. The cogito 
must necessarily lead us to discover this total, out-of-reach 
presence of the in-itself. Of course the fact of this presence 
vrill be the very transcendence of the for-itself. But it is pre- 
cisely^ the nihilation which is the origin of transcendence 
conceived as the original bond between the for-itself and the 
in-itself. Thus we catch a glimpse of a way of getting out of 
&e cogito. We shall see later indeed that the profound mean- 
ing of the cogito is essentially to refer outside itself. But it is 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 135 

not yet time to describe this characteristic of the for-itself. 
What our ontological description has immediately revealed 
is that this being is the foundation of itself as a lack of being; 
that is, that it determines its being by means of a being 
which it is not. 

Nevertheless there are many ways of not being and some 
of them do not touch the inner nature of the being which is 
not what it is not. If, for example, I say of an inkwell that it 
is not a bird, the inkwell and the bird remain untouched by 
the negation. This is an external relation which can be estab- 
lished only by a human reality acting as witness. By contrast, 
there is a type of negation which establishes an internal rela- 
tion between what one denies and that concerning which the 
denial is made.^° 

Of all internal negations, the one which penetrates most 
deeply into being, the one which constitutes in its being the 
being concerning which it makes the denial along with the 
being which it denies — this negation is lack. This lack does 
not belong to the nature of the in-itself, which is aU positivity. 
It appears in the world only with the upsurge of human 
reality. It is only in the human world that there can be lacks. 
A lack presupposes a trinity: that which is missing or “the 
lacking,” that which misses what is lacking or “the existing,” 
and a totality which has been broken by the lacking and 
which would be restored by the synthesis of “the lacking” 
and “the existing” — this is “the lacked.”^^ The being which 
is released to the intuition of human reality is always that to 
which some thing is lacking — i.e., the existing. For example, 
if I say that the moon is not full and that one quarter is 
lacking, I base this judgment on full intuition of the crescent 
moon. Thus what is released to intuition is an in-itself which 
by itself is neither complete nor incomplete but which simply 
is what it is, without relation with other beings. In order for 
this in-itself to be grasped as the crescent moon, it is neces- 
sary that a human reality surpass the given toward the proj- 
ect of the realized totality — ^here the disc of the full moon — 

Hegelian opposition belongs to this type of negation. But this opposi- 
on must itself be based on an original internal negation; that is, on 
For example, if the non-essential becomes in its turn the essential, 

^ is because it is experienced as a lack in the heart of the essential 
“th 1 “the lacking,” I'exlstant, “the existing": le manqui. 

e lacked." Le manque is “the lack.” At times when manqu6 is used as 
^ jective, I have translated it as *‘mi5sing/’ e.g., Ten-soi manqui, ‘‘the 
mussing in-itself.” 



136 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


and return toward the given to constitute it as the crescent 
moon; that is, in order to realize it in its being in terms of 
the totality which becomes its foundation. In this same sur- 
passing the lacking will be posited as that whose synthetic 
addition to the existing will reconstitute the synthetic totality 
of the lacked. In this sense the lacking is of the same na- 
ture as the existing; it would suffice to reverse the situation 
in order for it to become the existing to which the lacking 
is mis sing, while the existing would become the lacking. 
This lacking as the complement of the existing is determined 
in its being by the synthetic totality of the lacked. Thus in the 
human world, the incomplete being which is released to intui- 
tion as lacking is constituted in its being by the lacked — 
that is, by what it is not. It is the full moon which confers on 
the crescent moon its being as crescent; what-is-not determines 
what-is. It is in the being of the existing, as the correlate of a 
human transcendence, to lead outside itself to the being 
which it is not — as to its meaning. 

Human reality by which lack appears in the world must 
be itself a lack. For lack can come into being only through 
lack; the in-itself can not be the occasion of lack in- the 
in-itself. In other words, in order for being to be lacking or 
lacked, it is necessary that a being make itself its own lack; 
only a being which lacks can surpass being toward the lacked. _ 

The existence of desire as a human fact is sufficient to 
prove that human reality is a lack. In fact how can we ex- 
plain desire if we insist on viewing it as a psychic state; that 
is, as a being whose nature is to be what it is? A being which 
is what it is, to the degree that it is considered as being what 
it is, summons nothing to itself in order to complete itself. 
An incomplete circle does not call for completion unless it is 
surpassed by- human transcendence. In itself it is complete 
and perfectly positive as an open curve. A psychic state which 
existed^ with the sufficiency of this curve could not possess 
in addition the slightest “appeal to” something else; it would 
be itself without any relation to what is not it. In order to 
constitute it as hunger or thirst, an external transcendence 
surpassing it toward the totality “satisfied hunger” would be 

necessary, just as the crescent moon is surpassed toward the 
full moon. 

We will not get out of the difficulty by making desire a 
conatus conceived in the manner of a physical force For the 
conatus once again, even if we grant it the efficiency of a 


IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 137 


cause, can not possess in itself the character of a reaching out 
toward another state. The conatus as the producer of states 
can not be identified with desire as the appeal from a state. 
Neither will recourse to psycho-physiological parallelism en- 
able us better to clear away the dfficulties. Thirst as an organic 
phenomenon, as a “physiological” need of water, does not 
exist. An organism deprived of water presents certain positive 
phenomena: for example, a certain coagulatmg thickening of 
the blood, which provokes in turn certain other phenomena. 
The ensemble is a positive state of the organism which refers 
only to itself, exactly as the thickening of a solution from 
which the water has evaporated can not be considered by itself 
as the solution’s desire of water. If we suppose an exact corre- 
spondence between the mental and the physiological, this 
correspondence can be established only on the basis of on- 
tological identity, as Spinoza has seen. Consequently the being 
of psychic thirst will be the being in itself of a state, and we 
are referred once again to a transcendent witness. But then 
the thirst will be desire for this transcendence but not for it- 
self; it will be desire in the eyes of another. If desire is to be - 
able to be desire to itself it must necessarily be itself tran- 
scendence; that is, it must by nature be an escape from itself 
toward the desired object. In other words, it must be a lack — 
but not an object-lack, a lack undergone, created by the 

surpassing which it is not; it must be its own lack of . 

Desire is a lack of being. It is haunted in its inmost being by 
the being of which it is desire. Thus it bears witness to the ex- 
istence of lack in the being of human reality. But if human 
reality is lack, then it is through human reality that the trinity 
of the existing, the lacking and the lacked comes into being. 
What exactly are the three terms of this trinity? 

That which plays here the role of the existing is what is 
released to the cogito as the immediate of the desire; for ex- 
ample, it is this for-itself which we have apprehended as not 
bemg what it is and being what it is not. But how are we to 
define the lacked? 

To answer this question, we must return to the idea of lack 
and determine more exactly the bond which unites the exist- 
ing to the lacking. This bond can not be one of simple con- 
iguity. K what is lacking is in its very absence still, pro- 
oundly present at the heart of the existing, it is because the 

isting and the lacking are at the same moment apprehended 
surpassed in the unity of a single totality. And that which 



138 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

constitutes itself as lack can do so only by surpassing itself 
toward one great broken form. Thus lack is appearance on 
the ground of a totality. Moreover it matters little whether tWs 
totality has been originally given and is now broken (e.g., 
“The arms of the Venus di Milo are now lacking”) or wheth- 
er it has never yet been realized (e.g., “He lacks courage”). 
What is important is only that the lacking and the existing are 
given or are apprehended as about to be annihilated in the 
unity of the totality which is lacked. Everything which is lack- 
ing is Tan king to for — : What is given in the unity 

of a primitive upsurge is the for, conceived as not yet being 
or as not being any longer, an absence toward which the cur- 
tailed existing surpasses itself or is surpassed and thereby con- 
stitutes itself as curtailed. What is the for of human reality? 

The for-itself, as the foundation of itself, is the upsurge of 
the negation. The for-itself founds itself in so far as it denies 
in relation to itself a certain being or a mode of being. What 
it denies or nihilates, as we know, is being-in-itself. But no 
matter what being-in-itself: human reality is before all else 
its own nothingness. What it denies or nihilates in relation to 
itself as for-itself can be only itself. The meaning of human 
reality as nihilated is constituted by this nihilation and this 
presence in it of what it nihilates; hence the self-as-being-in- 
itself is what human reality lacks and what makes its mean- 
ing. Since human reality in its primitive relation to itself is 
not what it is, its relation to itself is not primitive and can 
derive its meaning only from an original relation which is the 
null relation or identity. It is the self which would be what it 
is which allows the for-itself to be apprehended as not being 
what it is; the relation denied in the definition of the for-itself 
— ^which as such should be first posited — is a relation (given 
as perpetually absent) between the for-itself and itself in the 
mode of identity. The meaning of the subtle confusion by 
wMch thirst escapes and is not thirst (in so far as it' is con- 
sciousness of thirst) is a thirst which would be thirst and 
which haunts it. What the for-itself lacks is the self — or itself 
as in-itself . 

. Nevertheless we must not confuse this missing in-itself 
(the lacked) with that of facticity. The in-itself of facticity 
in its failure to found itself is reabsorbed in pure presence in 
the world on the p^ of the for-itself. The missing in-itself, 
on the other hand, is pure absence. Moreover the failure of 

e act to found the in-itself has caused the for-itself to rise 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 139 

up from the in-itself as the foundation of its own nothingness.. 
But the meaning of the missing act of founding remains as 
transcendent. The for-itself in its being is failure because it is 
the foundation only of itself as nothingness. In truth this 
failure is its very being, but it has meaning only if- the for- 
itself apprehends itself as failure in the presence of the being 
which it has failed to be; that is, of the being which would 
be the foundation of its being and no longer merely the 
foundation of its nothingness — or, to put it another way, 
which would be its foundation as coincidence with itself. 
By nature the cogito refers to the lacking and to the lacked, 
for the cogito is haunted by being, as Descartes well realized. 

Such is the origin of transcendence. Human reality is its 
own surpassing toward what it lacks; it surpasses itself toward 
the particular being which it would be if it were what it is. 
Human reality is not something which exists first in order 
afterwards to lack this or that; it exists first as lack and in 
immediate, synthetic connection with what it lacks. Thus the 
pure event by which human reality rises as a presence in the 
world is apprehended by itself as its own lack. In its coming 
into existence human reality grasps itself as an incomplete 
being. It apprehends itself as being in so far as it is not, in 
the presence of the particular totality which it lacks and 
which it is in the form of not being it and which is what it 
is. Human reality is a perpetual surpassing toward a coin- 
cidence with itself which is never given. If the cogito reaches 
toward being, it is because by its very thrust it surpasses 
itself toward being by qualifying itself in its being as the 
being to which coincidence with self is lacking in order for 
it to be what it is. The cogito is indissolubly linked to 
being-in-itself, not as a thought to its object — ^which would 
make the in-itself relative — ^but as a lack to that which 
defines its lack. In this sense the second Cartesian proof is 
rigorous. Imperfect being surpasses itself toward perfect 
being; the being which is the foundation only of its nothing- 
ness surpasses itself toward the being which is the foundation 
of its being. But the being toward which human reality sur- 
passes itself is not a transcendent God; it is at the heart of 
r®nhty; it is only human reality itself as totality. 

. totality is not the pure and simple contingent in- 
1 self of the transcendent. If what consciousness apprehends 
T toward which it surpasses itself were the pure in- 

^ olf, it would coincide with the annihilation of consciousness. 



140 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

But consciousness does not surpass itself toward its annihila- 
tion; it does not want to lose itself in the in-itself of identity 
at the limit of its surpassing. It is for the for-itself as such 
that the for-itself lays claim to being-in-itself . 

Thus this perpetually absent being which haunts the for- 
itself is itself fixed in the in-itself. It is the impossible syn- 
thesis of the for-itself and the in-itself; it would be its own 
foundation not as nothingness but as being and would pre- 
serve within it the necessary translucency of consciousness 
along with the coincidence with itself of being-in-itself. It 
would preserve in it that turning back upon the self which 
conditions every necessity and every foundation. But this re- 
turn to the self would be without distance; it would not be 
presence to itself, but identity with itself. In short, this 
being would be exactly the self which we have shown can 
exist only as a perpetually evanescent relation, but it would be 
this self as substantial being. Thus human reality arises as such 
in the presence of its own totality or self as a lack of that 
totality. And this totality can not be given by nature, 
since it combines in itself the incompatible characteristics of 
the in-itself and the for-itself. 

Let no one reproach us with capriciously inventing a being 
of this kind; when by a further movement of thought the 
being and absolute absence of this totality are hypostasized as 
transcendence beyond the world, it takes on the name of God. 
Is not God a being who is what he is — in that he is all positiv- 
ity and the foundation of the world — and at the same time 
a being who is not what he is and who is what he is not — in 
that he is self-consciousness and the necessary foundation of ■ 
himself? The being of human reality is suffering because it 
rises in being as perpetually haunted by a totality which it is 
without bemg able to be it, prewsely because it could not 
attain the in-itself without losing itself as for-itself. Human 
reality Aerefore is by nature an unhappy consciousness with 
no possibility of surpassing its unhappy state. 

But what exactly is the nature of this being toward which 
unhappy consciousness surpasses itself? Shall we say that it 
does not exist? Those contradictions which we discovered 
in it prove only that it can not be realized. Nothing can 
hold out against this self-evident truth: consciousness cani 
exist only as engaged in this being which surrounds it 
on all sides and which paralyzes it with its phantom pres- 
ence. Shall we say that it is a being relative to consciousness? 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 141 


This would be to confuse it with the object of a thesis. This 
being is not posited through and before consciousness; there 
is no consciousness of this being since it haunts non-thetic 
self-consciousness. It points to consciousness as the meaning 
of its being and yet consciousness is no more conscious of it 
than of itself. StUl it can not escape from consciousness; but 
inasmuch as consciousness enjoys being a consciousness (of) 
being, this being is there. Consciousness does not confer 
meaning on this being as it does for this inkwell or this pen- 
cil; but without this being, which it is in the form of not 
being it, consciousness would not be consciousness — i.e., lack. 
On the contrary, consciousness derives for itself its meaning as 
consciousness from this being. This being comes into the 
world along with consciousness, at once in its heart and out- 
side it; it is absolute transcendence in absolute immanence. 
It has no priority over consciousness, and consciousness 
has no priority over it. They form a dyad. Of course this 
being could not exist without the for-itself, but neither 
could the for-itself exist without it. Consciousness in relation 
to this being stands in the mode of being this being, for this 
bemg is consciousness, but as a being which consciousness 
can not be. It is consciousness itself, in the heart of con- 
sciousness, and yet out of reach, as an absence, an unrealiz- 
able. Its nature is to enclose its own contradiction within it- 
self; its relation to the for-itself is a total immanence which 
is achieved in total transcendence. 

Furthermore this being need not be conceived as present 
to consciousness with only the abstract characteristics which 
our study has established. The concrete consciousness arises in 
situation, and it is a unique, individualized consciousness of 
this situation and (of) itself in situation. It is to this concrete 
consciousness that the self, is present, and all the concrete 
characteristics of consciousness have their correlates in the 
totality of the self. The self is individual; it is the individual 
completion of the self which haunts the for-itself. 

A feeling, for example, is a feeling in the presence of a 
norm; that is, a feeling of the same type but one which 
would be what it is. This norm or totality of the affective 
self is directly present as a lack suffered in the very heart 
pi suffering. One suffers and one suffers from not suffer- 
ing enough. The suffering of which we speak is never ex- 
actly that which we feel. What we call “noble” or “good” or 

true” suffering and what moves us is the suffering which we 



142 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

read on the faces of others, better yet in portraits, in the face 
of a statue, in a tragic mask. It is a suffering which has being. 
It is presented to us as a compact, objective whole which did 
not await our coming in order to be and which overflows the 
consciousness which we have of it; it is there in the midst 
of the world, impenetrable and dense, like this tree or this 
stone; it endures; finally it is what it is. We can speak of it — 
that suffering there which is expressed by that set of the 
mouth, by that frown. It is supported and expressed by the 
physiognomy but not created by it. Suffering is posited upon 
the physiognomy; it is beyond passivity as beyond activity, 
beyond negation as beyond affirmation — it is. However it can 
be only a consciousness of self. We know well that this mask 
does not express the unconscious grimace of a sleeper or the 
rictus of a dead man. It refers to possibilities, to a situation 
in the world. The suffering is the conscious relation to these 
possibilities, to this situation, but it is solidified, cast in . the 
bronze of being. And it is as such that it fascinates us; it 
stands as a degraded approximation of that suffering-in-itself 
which haunts our own suffering. The suffering which I ex- 
perience, on the contrary, is never adequate suffering, due 
to the fact that it nihilates itself as in-itself by the very act 
by which it founds itself. It escapes as suffering toward the 
consciousness of suffering. I can never be surprised by it, 
for it is only to the exact degree that I experience it. Its trans- 
lucency removes from it all depth. I can not observe it as I 
observe the suffering of the statue, since I make my own 
suffering and since I know it. If I must suffer, I should 
prefer that my suffering would seize me and flow over me like 
a storm, but instead I must raise it into existence in my free 
spontaneity. I should like simultaneously to be it and to con- 
quer it, but this enormous, opaque suffering, which should 
transport me out of myself, continues instead to touch me 
lightly with its wing, and I can not grasp it. I find only 
myself, myself who moans, myself who wails, myself who in 
order to realize this suffering which I am must play without 
respite the drama of suffering. I wring my hands, I cry in 
order that being-in-itselfs, their sounds, their gestures may 
run through the world, ridden by the suffering-in-itself which 
I can not be. Each groan, each facial expression of the man 
w o suffers aims at sculpturing a statue-in-itself of suffer- 
ing. But this statue will never exist save through others and 
or others. My suffering suffers from being what it is not 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 143 


and from not being what it is. At the point of being made 
one with itself, it escapes, separated from itself by nothing, 
by that nothingness of which it is itself the foundation. It is 
loquacious because it is not adequate, but its ideal is silence — 
the silence of the statue, of the beaten man who lowers his 
head and veils his face without speaking. But with this man 
too — it is for me that he does not speak. In himself he chat- 
ters incessantly, for the words of the inner language are like 
the outlines of the “self” of suffering. It is for my eyes that 
he is “crushed” by suffering; in himself he feels himself 
responsible for that grief which he wills even while not wish- 
ing it and which he does not wish even while willing it, that 
grief which is haunted by a perpetual absence — ^the absence of 
the motionless, mute suffering which is the self, the concrete, 
out-of-reach totality of the for-itself which suffers, the for 
of Human-Reality in suffering. We can see that my suffering 
never posits this suffering-in-itself which visits it. My real 
suffering is not an effort to reach to the self. But it can be 
suffering only as consciousness (of) not being enough suffer- 
ing in the presence of that full and absent suffering. 

Now we can ascertain more exactly what is the being of 
the self; it is value. Value is affected with the double charac- 
ter, which moralists have very inadequately explained, of 
both being unconditionally and not being. Qua value indeed, 
value has being, but this normative existent does not have to 
be precisely , as reality. Its being is to be value; that is, not-to- 
be being. Thus the being of value qua value is the being of 
what does not have being. Value then appears inapprehensi- 
ble. To take it as being is to risk totally misunderstanding its 
unreality and to make of it, as sociologists do, a requirement 
of fact among other facts. In this case the contingency of 
being destroys value. But conversely if one looks only at the 
ideality of values, one is going to extract being from them, 
and then for lack of being, they dissolve. Of course, as Scheler 
has shown, I can achieve an intuition of values in terms of 
concrete exemplifications; I can grasp nobility in a noble act 
But value thus apprehended is not given as existing on the 
same level of being as the act on which it confers value — ^in 
the way, for example, that the essence “red” is in relation to a 
particular red. Value is given as a beyond of the acts con- 
rpnted, as the limit, for example, of die infinite progression 
u noble acts. Value is beyond being. Yet if we are not to be 


144 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

taken in by fine words, we must recognize that this being 
which is beyond being possesses being in some way at least. 

These considerations suffice to make us admit that human 
reality is that by which value arrives in the world. But the 
meaning of being for value is that it is that toward which a 
being surpasses its being; every value-oriented act is a wrench- 
ing away from its own being toward . Since value is al- 

ways and everywhere the beyond of all surpassings, it can be 
considered as the unconditioned unity of all surpassings of be- 
ing. Thereby it makes a dyad with the reality which originally 
surpasses its being and by which surpassing comes into being 
— i.e., with human reality. We see also that since value is the 
unconditioned beyond of all surpassings, it must be originally 
the beyond of the very being which surpasses, for that is 
the only way in which value can be the original beyond of 
all possible surpassings. If every surpassing must be able to 
be surpassed, it is necessary that the being which surpasses 
should be a priori surpassed in so far as it is the very source 
of surpassings. Thus value taken in its origin, or the supreme 
value, is the beyond and the for of transcendence. It is the 
beyond which surpasses and which provides the foundation 
for all my surpassings but toward which I can never surpass 
myself, precisely because my surpassings presuppose it. 

In all cases of lack value is “the lacked”: it is not “the 
lacking.” Value is the self in so far as the self haunts the heart 
of the for-itself as that for which the for-itself is. The 
supreme value toward which consciousness at every instant 
surpasses itself by its ve^ being is the absolute being of the 
self with its characteristics of identity, of purity, of perma- 
nence, etc,, and as its own foundation. This is what enables us 
to conceive why value can simultaneously be and not be. It is 
as the meaning and the beyond of all surpassing; it is as the 
absent in-itself which haunts being-for-itself. But as soon as 
we consider value, we see that it is itself a surpassing of this 
being-in-itself, since value gives being to itself. It is beyond 
its own being since with the type of being of coincidence 
with self, it immediately surpasses this being, its permanence. 
Its purity, its consistency, its identity, its silence, by reclaiming 
these qualities by virtue of presence to itself. And conversely 
It we start by considering it as presence to itself, this pres- 
ence immediately is solidified, fixed in the in-itself. More- 
over It IS m Its being the missing totality toward which a being 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 14S 

makes itself be. It arises for a being, not as this being is what 
it is in full contingency, but as it is the foundation of its own 
nihilation. In this sense value haunts being as being founds 
itself but not as being is. Value haunts freedom. This means 
that the relation of value to the for-itself is very particular: 
it is the being which has to be in so far as it is the foundation 
of its nothingness of being. Yet while it has to be this being, 
this is not because it is under the pressure of an external con- 
straint, nor because value, like the Unmoved Mover of Aris- 
totle, exercises over it an attraction of fact, nor is it because its 
being has been received; but it is because in its being it 
makes itself be as having to be this being. In a word the 
self, the for-itself, and their inter-relation stand within 
the limits of an unconditioned freedom — in the sense that 
nothing makes value exist — ^unless it is that freedom which 
by the same stroke makes me myself exist — and also within 
the limits of concrete facticity — since as the foundation of 
its nothingness, the for-itself can not be the foundation of its 
being. There is then a total contingency of being-for-value 
(which will come up again in connection with morality to 
paralyze and relativize it) and at the same time a free and 
absolute necessity.^^ 

Value in its original upsurge is not posited by the for-itself; 
it is consubstantial with it — ^to such a degree that there is no 
consciousness which is not haunted by its value and that hu- 
man-reality in the broad sense includes both the for-itself 
and value. If value haunts the for-itself without being posited 
by it, this is because value is not the object of a thesis; 
otherwise the for-itself would have to be a positional object 


“ One will perhaps be tempted to translate the trinity under consideration 
into Hegelian terms and to make of the in-itself the thesis, of the for-itself 
the antithesis, and of the in-itself-for-itself or value the synthesis. But it 
must be noted here that while the For-itself lacks the In-itself, the In-itself 
does not lack the For-itself. There is then no reciprocity in the opposition. 

a word, the For-itself remains non-essential and contingent in relation to 
1 e ^ In-itself, and it is this non-essentiality which we earlier called its 
acticity. In addition, the synthesis or value would indeed be a return to 
e thesis, then a return upon itself; but as this is an unrealizable totality, 
® For-itself is not a moment which can be surpassed As such its nature 
^proachfes much nearer to the “ambiguous” realities of Kierkegaard. Fur- 
. we find here a double play of unilateral oppositions: the For-itself 

M ®^^se lacks the In-itself, which does not lack the For-itself; but in 
^ sense the In-itself lacks its own possibility (or the lacking For- 
® Ji which in this case does not lack the In-itself. 


146 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

to itself since value and the for-itself can arise only in the 
consubstantial unity of a dyad. Thus the for-itself as a non- 
thetic self-consciousness does not exist in the face of value in 
the sense that for Leibniz the monad exists “alone in the face 
of God.” Value therefore is not known at this stage since 
knovi^ledge posits the object in the face of consciousness. 
Value is merely given with the non-thetic transluccncy of the 
for-itself, which makes itself be as the consciousness of being. 
Value is everywhere and nowhere; at the heart of the nihilat- 
ing relation “reflection-reflecting,” it is present and out of 
reach, and it is simply lived as the concrete meaning of that 
lack which makes my present being. In order for value to 
become the object of a thesis, the for-itself which it haunts 
must also appear before the regard of reflection. Reflective 
consciousness in fact accomplishes two things by the same 
stroke; the Erlebnis reflected-on is posited in its nature as 
lack, and value is disengaged as the out-of-rcach meaning of 
what is lacked. Thus reflective consciousness can be properly 
called a moral consciousness since it can not arise without 
at the same moment disclosing values. It is obvious that I 
remain free in my reflective consciousness to direct my at- 
tention on these values or to neglect them — exactly as it 
depends on me to look more closely at this table, my pen, or 
my package of tobacco. But whether they are the object of 
a detailed attention or not, in any case they are. 

It is not necessary to conclude, however, that the reflective 
regard is the only one which can make value appear, nor 
should we by analogy project the values of our for-itself into 
the world of transcendence. If the object of intuition is a 
phenomenon of human reality but transcendent, it is re- 
leased immediately with its value, for the for-itself of the 
Other is not a hidden phenomenon which would be given only 
as the conclusion of a reasoning by analogy. It manifests it- 
self originally to my for-itself; as we shall see, the presence of 
the for-itself as for-others is even the necessary condition for 
the constitution of the for-itself as such. In this upsurge of 
the for-others, value is given as in the upsurge of the for-itself, 
a though in a different mode of being. But we can not treat 
here the objective encounter with values in the world since 
we have not elucidated the nature of the for-others. We shall 
return to the examination of this question in the third part 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 147 


IV. THE FOR-ITSELF AND THE BEING 
OF POSSIBILITIES 

We have seen that human reality as for-itself is a lack and 
that what it lacks is a certain coincidence with itself. Con- 
cretely, each particular for-itself {Erlebnis) lacks a certain 
particular and concrete reality, which if the for-itself were 
synthetically assimilated with it, would transform the for-itself 
into itself. It lacks something for something else — as the 
broken disc of the moon lacks that which would be necessary 
to complete it and transform it into a full moon. Thus the 
lacking arises in the process of transcendence and is deter- 
mined by a return toward the existing in terms of the 
lacked. The lacking thus defined is transcendent and comple- 
mentary in relation to the existing. They are then of the same 
nature. What the crescent moon lacks in order to be a full 
moon is precisely a fragment of moon; what the obtuse angle 
ABC lacks in order to make two right angles is the acute angle 
CBD. What the for-itself lacks in order to be made a whole 
with itself is the for-itself. But we are by no means dealing 
with a strange for-itself; that is, with a for-itself which I am 
not. In fact since the risen ideal is the coincidence with self, 
the lacking for-itself is a for-itself which I am. But on the 
other hand, if I were it in the mode of identity, the ensemble 
would become an in-itself. I am the lacking for-itself in the 
mode of having to be the for-iteelf which I am not, in order to 
identify myself with it in the unity of the self. Thus the 
original transcendent relation of the for-itself to the self 
perpetually outlines a project of identification of the for-itself 
with an absent for-itself which it is and which it lacks. What 
IS given as the peculiar lack of each for-itself and what is 
strictly^ defined as lacking to precisely this for-itself and no 
other is the possibility of the for-itself. The possible rises 
on the ground of the nihilation of the for-itself. It is not con- 
ceived thematically afterwards as a means of reuniting the 
^5^her the upsurge of the for-itself as the nihilation of 
he in-itself and the decompression of being causes possibility 
0 arhe as one of the aspects of this decompression of being; 
at IS, as a way of being what one is — at a distance from 
c self. Thus the for-itself can not appear without being 
aunted by value and projected toward its own possibles. Yet 
as soon as it refers us to its possibles, the cogito drives us 



148 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


outside the instant toward that which it is in the mode of 
not being it. 

In order to understand better how human reality both is 
and is not its own possibilities, we must return to the notion 
of the possible and attempt to elucidate it. 

With the possible as with value there is the greatest diffi- 
culty in understanding its being, for it is given as prior to the 
being of which it is the pure possibility; and yet qua possible, 
at least, it necessarily must have being. Do we not say, “It is 
possible that he may come.” Since Leibniz the term “possible” 
is usually applied to an event which is not engaged in ’an 
existing causal series such that the event can be surely de- 
termined and which involves no contradiction either with it- 
self or with the system under consideration. Thus defined the 
possible is possible only with regard to knowledge since we are 
not in a position either to affirm or to deny the possible con- 
fronted. 


Hence we may take two attitudes in the face of the possi- 
le. We can consider, as Spinoza did, that possibilities exist 
only m connection with our ignorance and that they disappear 
when our ignorance disappears. In this case the possible is 
only a subjective stage on the road to perfect knowledge; it 

♦ ^1 ^ psychic mode; as confused or cur- 

tailed thought It has a concrete being but not as a property of 
the world But it is also permissible, as Leibniz does, to make 
of possibles objects _of thought for the divine 
confer on them a mode of absolute real- 
ty; ffiis position reserves for the divine will the power to real- 
system among them. In this case, although the 
of perceptions is strictly determined, and al- 
all-knnwt formula of Adam’s substance an 

sion it establish with certainty Adam’s deci- 

not nick thp « ^ possible that Adam might 

tue of thp fh^ \ means only that there exists by vir- 
syLm o cot understanding another 

divine thou&htf Th- possible is uniquely that of the 

Which h“bS“re?S T “ 

tivity has hepn hp-ra. u j ' course the idea of subjec- 

with a divine consciout its limit, for we are dealing 

ss, not mine; and if we have at the 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 149 

outset made a point of confusing subjectivity and finitude, 
subjectivity disappears when the understanding becomes in- 
finite. Yet the fact remains that the possible is a thought 
which is only thought. Leibniz himself seems to have wished 
to confer an autonomy and a sort of peculiar weight on possi- 
bilities, for several of the metaphysical fragments published by 
Couturat show us possibles organizing themselves into systems 
of co-possibles in which the fullest and richest tend by them- 
selves to be realized. But there is here only a suggestion of 
such a doctrine, and Leibniz has not developed it — doubtless 
because he could not do so. To give possibles a tendency to- 
ward being means either that the possible is already in full 
being and that it has the same type of being — ^in the sense 
that we grant to the bud a tendency to become a flower — or 
else that the possible in the bosom of the divine understanding 
is already an idea-force and that the maximum of idea-forces 
organized in a system, automatically releases the divine will. 
But in the latter case we do not get out of the subjective. 
K then we define possible as non-contradictory, it can have 
being only as the thought of a being prior to the real world 
or prior to the pure consciousness of the world such as it is. 
In either case the possible loses its nature as possible and 
is reabsorbed in the subjective being of the representation. 

But this represented-being of the possible can not account 
for its nature; on the contrary it destroys its nature. In the 
everyday use which we make of the possible, we can in no 
way apprehend it either as an aspect of our ignorance or as 
a non-contradictory structure belonging to a world not real- 
ized and at the margin of this world. The possible appears to 
us as a property of beings. After glancing at the sky I state, 
^‘It is possible that it may rain.” I do not understand the 
possible” here as meaning “without contradiction with the 
present state of the sky.” This possibility belongs to the sky 
as a threat; it represents a surpassing on the part of these 
clouds, which I perceive, toward rain. The clouds carry this 
surpassing within themselves, which means not that the sur- 
passing will be realized but only that the structure of being 
Of the cloud is a transcendence toward rain. The possibility 
ere is given as belonging to a particular being for which it is 

xvh'^u^’^' This fact is sufficiently indicated by the way in 
ich we say indifferently of a friend for whom we are wait- 
It is possible that he may come” or “He can come.” 
Us the possible can not be reduced to a subjective reality. 



150 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


Neither is it prior to the real or to the true. It is a concrete 
property of already existing realities. In order for the rain to 
be possible, there must be clouds in the sky. To suppress being 
in order to establish the possible in its purity is an absurd 
attempt. The frequently cited passage from not-being to 
being via possibility does not correspond to the real. To be 
sure, the possible state does not exist yet; but it is the possible 
state of a certain existent which sustains by its being the 
possibility and the non-being of its future state. 

Certainly we are running the risk of letting these few 
remarks lead us to the ^yistotelian “potentiality.” This would 
be to fall from Charybdis to Scylla, to avoid the purely logi- 
cal conception of possibility only to fall into a magical con- 
ception. Being-in-itself can not “be potentiality” or “have 
potentialities. In itself it is what it is — in the absolute pleni- 
tude of its identity. The cloud is not “potential rain”; it is, in 
Itself, a certain quantity of water vapor, which at a given tem- 
perature and under a given pressure is strictly what it is. The 
m-itself is actuality. But we can conceive clearly enough how 
attitude in its attempt to dehumanize the 
Z possMities as potentialities and has 

S mfr T making of them the pure subjective results 

ignorance. The first 
mrou^ comes into the world 

^^°«ds can change into rain 

moon crescent 

toward the fiUi ^ ^ surpass the crescent 

make of ibp nn was it necessary afterwards to 

tivity? Just as^hprl ^ ^ simple ^ven of our psychic subjec- 
to the world thmn ^ world only if it comes 

can be^ossibSrf? own lack, so there 

being Which bfor itself in' " 

the pure “ essence coincide with 

first rivL ara?obt.r'^^^^'^"^' ^ ^ possibility is not 

lar bling SeTthou^V of a particu- 

close thf possible wlhiiih^rfTfT® consider it, can not en- 
sider possibles in the heart of content. If we con- 

content of the divin*. fj, understanding as the 

simply '^®y become pur^ and 

potheLJSthough^ ^ P^o hy- 

negative power could come understand how this 

come to a bemg wholly positiv^that 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 151 


Ood has the power to deny; i.e., to bring negative judgments 
to bear on his representations. Even so we can not understand 
how he, could transform these representations into possibles. 
At the Very most the result of the negation would be to con- 
stitute them as “without real correspondent.” But to say that 
the centaur does not exist is by no means to say that it is pos- 
sible. Neither affirmation nor negation can confer the charac- 
ter of possibility on a representation. K it is claimed that this 
character can be given by a synthesis of negation and aflarma- 
tion, still we must observe that a synthesis is not a sum and 
that it would be necessary to account for this synthesis as an 
organic totality provided with its own meaning and not in 
terms of the elements of which it is a synthesis. Similarly the 
pure subjective and negative attestation of our ignorance con- 
cerning the relation to the real of one of our ideas could 
not account for the character of possibility in this representa- 
tion; it could only put us in a state of indifference with re- 
spect to the representation and could not confer on it that 
right over the real which is the fundamental structure of the 
possible. If it is pointed out that certain tendencies influence 
me to expect this in preference to that, we shall say that 
these tendencies, far from explaining transcendence, on the 
contrary presuppose it; they must already, as we have seen, 
exist as a lack. Furthermore if the possible is not given in 
some way, these tendencies will be able to inspire us to hope 
that my representation may adequately correspond to reality 
but they will not be able to confer on me a right over the 
real. In a word the apprehension of the possible as such sup- 
poses an original surpassing. Every effort to establish the 
possible in terms of a subjectivity which would be what is — 
that is, which would close in upon itself— is on principle 
doomed to failure. 


But it is true that the possible is — so to speak — an option 
on being, and if it is true that the possible can come into the 
world only through a being which is its own possibility, this 
implies for human reality the necessity of being its being in 
the form of an option on its being. There is possibility 
when instead of being purely and simply what I am, I exist 
as the Right to be what I am. But this very right separates me 
from what I have the right to be. Property right appears only 
when someone contests my property, when already in some 
respect it is no longer mine. The tranquil enjoyment of what 
possess is a pure and simple fact, not a right. Thus if possi- 



152 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


bility is to exist, human reality as itself must- necessarily be 
something other than itself. This possible is that element of 
the For-itself which by nature escapes it qua For-itself. The 
possible is a new aspect of the nihil ation of the In-itself in 
For-itself. 

If the possible can in fact come into the world only 
through a being which is its own possibility, this is because 
the in-itself, being by nature what it is, can not “have” possi- 
bilities. The relation of the in-itself to a possibility can be 
established only externally by a being which- stands facing 
possibilities. The possibility of being stopped by a fold in the 
cloth belongs neither to the billiard ball which rolls nor to the 
cloth; it can arise only in the organization into a system of the 
ball and the cloth by a being which has a comprehension of 
possibles. But since this comprehension can neither come to it 
from without — i.e., from the in-itself — ^nor be limited to being 
only a thought as the subjective mode of consciousness, it 
must coincide with the objective structure of the being which 
comprehends its possibles^* To comprehend possibility qua 
possibility or to be its own possibles is one and the same 
necessity for the being such that in its being, its being is in 
question. But to be its own possibility — that is, to be defined 
by it is precisely to be defined by that part of itself which 
it is not, is to be defined as an escape-from-itself toward 
. In short, from the moment that I want to account 
for my immediate being simply in so far as it is what it is 
not and is not what it is, I am thrown outside it toward a 
meaning wluch is out of reach and which can in no way be 
confused with immanent subjective representation. Descartes 
apprehending himself by means of the cogito as doubt can not 
hope to define this doubt as methodological doubt or even as 
doubt if he limits himself to what is apprehended by pure 
instantaneous observation. Doubt can be understood only in 
terms of the always open possibility that future evidence may 
remove it; it can be grasped as doubt only in so far as it 
refers to possibilities of the which are not yet realized 

but always open. 

Strictly speaWng, no fact of consciousness is this conscious- 
Mss. ven if like Husserl we should quite artificially endow 
ms consciousness with intra-structural protentions, these 
ou ave in them no way of surpassing the consciousness 

^ corrupt, reading d’ xn- Obviously Sartre in- 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 153 

whose structure they are and hence would pitifully fall back 
on themselves — like flies bumping their noses on the window 
without being able to clear the glass. As soon as we wish to 
define a consciousness as doubt, perception, thirst, etc., we 
are referred to the nothingness of what is not yet. Conscious- 
ness (of) reading is not consciousness (of) reading this 
letter or this word or this sentence, or even this paragraph; it 
is consciousness (of) reading this book, which refers me 
to all the pages still unread, to all the pages already read, 
which by definition detaches consciousness from itself. A con- 
sciousness which would be consciousness of what it is, would 
be obliged to spell out each word. 

Concretely, each for-itself is a lack of a certain coincidence 
with itself. This means that it is haunted by the presence of 
that with which it should coincide in order to be itself. But 
as this coincidence in Self is always coincidence with Self, 
the being which the For-itself lacks, the being which would 
make the For-itself a Self by assimilation with it — this being 
is still the For-itself. We have seen that the For-itself is a 
“presence to itself”; what this presence-to-itself lacks can fail 
to appear to it only as presence-to-itself. The determining re- 
lation of the for-itself to its possibility is a nihilating re- 
laxation of the bond of presence-to-itself; this relaxation 
extends to transcendence since the presence-to-itself which the 
For-itself lacks is a presence-to-itself which is not. Thus the 
For-itself in so far as it is not itself is a presence-to-itself 
which lacks a certain presence-to-itself, and it is as a lack 
of this presence that it is presence-to-itself. \ 

Every consciousness lacks something for something. But 
it must be understood that the lack does not come to it from 
without as in the case of the crescent moon as related to the full 
moon. The lack of the for-itself is a lack which it is. The out- 
line of a presence-to-itself as that which is lacking to the for- 
itself is what constitutes the being of the for-itself as the 
foundation of its own nothingness. The possible is an absence 
constitutive of consciousness in so far as consciousness itself 
Wakes itself. Thirst — for example — ^is never suflSciently thirst 
inasmuch as it makes itself thirst; it is haunted by the presence 
of the Self of Thirst-itself. But in so far as it is haunted by 
mis concrete .value, it puts itself in question in its being as 
acking a certain For-itself which would realize it as satisfied 
t urst and which would confer on it being-in-itself. This miss- 
wg For-itself is the Possible. Actually it is not exact to say 


154 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


that a Thirst tends toward its own annihilation as thirst; there 
is no consciousness which aims at its own suppression as such. 
Yet thirst is a lack, as we pointed out earlier. As such it 
wishes to be satisfied; but this satisfied thirst, which would be 
realized by s\'nthetic assimilation in an act of coincidence of 
the For-itself-desire or Thirst with the For-itself-rcflection or 
act of drinking, is not aimed at as the suppression of the 
thirst. Quite the contrary the aim is the thirst passed on to the 
plenitude of being, the thirst which grasps and incorporates 
repletion into itself as the Aristotelian form grasps and trans- 
forms matter; it becomes eternal thirst. 

This point of view is very late and reflective — ^like that 
of the man who drinks to get rid of his thirst, like that of the 
man who goes to brothels to get rid of his sexual desire. 
Thirst, sexual desire, in the unreflective and naive state want 


to enjoy themselves; they seek that coincidence with self 
which is satisfaction, where thirst knows itself as thirst at the 
same time that the dr inkin g satisfies it, when by the very fact 
of its fulfillment it loses its character as lack while making 
itself be thirst in and through the satisfaction. Thus Epicurus 
is right and wrong at the same time; in itself indeed desire is 
an emptiness. But no non-reflective project aims simply at 
suppressing this void. Desire by itself tends to perpetuate it- 
self, naan clings ferociously to his desires. What desire wishes 
to be is a filled emptiness but one which shapes its repletion 
as a mould shapes the bronze which has been poured inside 
it. The possible of the consciousness of thirst is the conscious- 
i^ss of drinking. We know moreover that coincidence vvdth 
the self is impossible, for the for-itself attained by the realiza- 
tion of the Possible will make itself be as for-itself— that is, 
with another horizon of possibilities. Hence the constant dis- 
appointment which accompanies repletion, the famous: “Is it 
r Qot directed at the concrete pleasure 

w c satisfaction gives but at the evanescence of the coinci- 

catch a glimpse of the origin of 
temporality smce thirst is its possible at the same time that it 

nil?/ T pof This nothingness which separates human 
reality from itself is at the origin of time. But we shall come 

cpn f A n must be noted here is that the For-itself is 
reparated from the Presence-to-itself which it lacks and which 

separated by Nothing and 

Lsn^ch 'T J in the world, 

inasmuch as the For-itself. lacking or possible, is For-itself 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 155 


as a presence to a certain state of the world. In this sense 
the being beyond which the For-itself projects the coinci- 
dence with itself is the world or distance of infinite being 
beyond which man must be reunited with his possible. We 
shall use the expression Circuit of self ness {Circuit de ipseite) 
for the relation of the for-itself with the possible which it 
is, and “world” for the totality of being in so far as it is 
traversed by the circuit of selfness. 

We are now in a position to elucidate the mode of being 
of the possible. The possible is the something which the For- 
itself lacks in order to be itself. Consequently it is not appro- 
priate to say that it is qua possible — ^unless by being we are to 
understand the being of an existent which “is made-to-be” in 
so far as it is made-not-to-be, or if you prefer, the appearance 
at a distance of what I am. The possible does not exist as a 
pure representation, not even as a denied one, but as a real 
lack of being which, qua lack, is beyond being. It has the 
being of a lack and as lack, it lacks being. The Possible is not, 
the possible is possibilized to the exact degree that the For- 
itself makes itself be; the possible determines in schematic out- 
line a location in the nothingness which the For-itself is 
beyond itself. Naturally it is not at first thematically posited; it 
is outlined beyond the world and gives my present perception 
its meaning as this is apprehended in the world in the circuit 
of selfness. But neither is the Possible ignored or unconscious; 
it outlines the limits of the non-thetic self-consciousness as a 
non-thetic consciousness. The non-reflective consciousness (of) 
thirst is apprehended by means of the glass of water as desir- 
able, without putting the Self in the centripetal position as the 
end of the desire. But the possible repletion appears as a non- 
positional correlate of the non-thetic self-consciousness on the 
horizon of the glass-in-the-midst-of-the-world. 


V. THE SELF AND THE CIRCUIT 
OF SELFNESS 

In an article in Recherches Philosophiques I attempted to 
show that the Ego does not belong to the domain of the for 
Uself.14 1 shall not repeat here. Let us note only the reason for 

Tr. The article to which Sartre refers is “La transcendance de I’ego, 
wquisse d une description ph6nom6nologique,” Recherches Philosophiques, 
VI, 1936-1937, pp. 85-123. [Transcendence of the Ego: An Existential 
eory of Consciousness. Noonday, 1957.3 


156 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


the transcendence of the Ego: as a unifying pole of Erleb- 
nisse the Ego is in-itself, not for-itself. If it were of the na- 
ture of consciousness, in fact, it would be to itself its own 
foundation in the translucency of the immediate. But then we 
would have to say that it is what it is not and that it is not 
what it is, and this is by no means the mode of being of the 
“1.” In fact the consciousness which I have of the “I” never 
exhausts it, and consciousness is not what causes it to come 
into existence; the “I” is always given as having been there 
before consciousness — and at the same time as possessing 
depths which have to be revealed gradually. Thus the Ego 
appears to consciousness as a transcendent in-itself,. as an exis- 
tent in the human world, not as of the nature of conscious- 
ness. 


Yet we need not conclude that the for-itself is a pure and 
simple impersonal” contemplation. But the Ego is far from 
being the personalizing pole of a consciousness which without 
it would remain in the impersonal stage; on the contrary, it is 
consciousness in its fundamental selfness which under certain 
conditions allows the appearance of the Ego as the transcen- 
dent phenomenon of that selfness. As we have seen, it is actu- 
ally impossible to say of the in-itself that it is itself. It 
simply IS. In this sense, some will say that the “I,” which 
hold to be the inhabitant of consciousness, is the 
Me of consciousness but not its own self. Thus through 
hypostasizmg^ the being of the for-itself which is reflected-on 
and makmg it into an in-itself, these writers fix and destroy 
movement of reflection upon the self; consciousness then 
would be a pure return to the Ego as to its self, but the Ego 

tonrfnr relation has been 

transformed into a simple centripetal relation, the center, 

moreover, being a nucleus of opacity. We, on the contrary 

scToUerV-^-^ ^11 St”: 

ralT hv i “finite move- 
T it is L idSTiiSt 

^senS^rbri ““tfititing reality of the 

S bSn the unity of being i a type 

ISg moieZt'of^^lfltf consciousness by the pme 
what confers npren i makes itself personal; for 

Sion of “‘“r T “ ”“"8 “ ”°t the posses- 

n bso-which K only the sign of the person^ty— 



IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF 157 

but it is the fact that the being exists for itself as a presence 
to itself. 

Now this first reflective movement involves in addition a 
second or selfness. In selfness my possible is reflected on my 
consciousness and determines it as what it is. Selfness repre- 
sents a degree of nihilation carried further than the pure 
presence to itself of the pre-reflective cogito — in the sense 
that the possible which I am is not pure presence to the for- 
itself as reflection to reflecting, but that it is absent-presence. 
Due to this fact the existence of reference as a structure of 
being in the for-itself is still more clearly marked. The for- 
itself is itself down there, beyond its grasp, in the far reaches 
of its possibilities. This free necessity of being — down there — 
what one is in the form of lack constitutes self ness or the 
second aspect of the person. In fact how can the person be 
defined if not as a free relation to himself? 

As for the world — i.e., the totality of beings as they exist 
within the -compass of the circuit of self ness — ^this can be 
only what human reality surpasses toward itself. To borrow 
Heidegger’s definition, the world is “that in terms of which 
human reality makes known to itself what it is.”^® The possible 
which is my possible is a possible for-itself and as such a 
presence to the in-itself as consciousness of the in-itself. What 
I seek in the face of the world is the coincidence with a for- 
itself which I am and which is consciousness of the world. But 
this possible which is non-thetically an absent-present to pres- 
ent consciousness is not present as an object of a positional 
consciousness, for in that case it would be reflected-on. The 
satisfied thirst which haunts my actual thirst is not conscious- 
ness (of) thirst as a satisfied thirst; it is a thetic consciousness 
of itself-drinking-from-a-glass and a non-positional self-con- 
sciousness. It then causes itself to be transcended toward the 
glass of which it is conscious; and as a correlate of this possible 
non-thetic consciousness, the glass-drunk-from haunts the full 
glass as its possible and constitutes it as a glass to be drunk 
rom. Thus the world by nature is mine in so far as it is the 
correlative in-itself of nothingness; that is, of the necessary 
0 Stacie beyond which I fimd myself as that which I am in the 
orm of having to be it.” Without the world there is no self- 
^6ss, no person; without selfness, without the person, there is 
world. But the world’s belonging to the person is never 

■~-wW h ^ Chapter Three of this Part to what extent this definition 

^ we adopt provisionaUy — ^is insufficient and erroneous. 



158 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

posited on the level of the pre-rcflcctivc cogito. It would be 
absurd to say that the world as it is known is known as mine. 
Yet this quality of “my-ness” in the world is a fugitive struc- 
ture, always present, a structure which I live. The world {is) 
mine because it is haunted by possibles, and the consciousness 
of each of these is a possible self-consciousness which I am; 
it is these possibles as such which give the world its unity anr* 
its meaning as the world. 

The examination of negating conduct and of bad faith 
has enabled us to approach the ontological study of the cogito, 
and the being of the cogito has appeared to us as being-for- 
itself. This being, under our observation, has been transcended 
toward value and possibilities; we have not been able to keep 
it within the substantial limits of the instantaneity of the 
Cartesian cogito. But precisely for this reason, we can not be 
content with the results which we have just obtained. If the 
cogito refuses instantaneity and if it is transcended toward its 
possibles, this can happen only within a temporal surpassing. 
It is “in time” that the for-itself is its own possibilities in the 
mode of “not being”; it is in time that my possibilities appear 
on the horizon of the world which they make mine. If, Aen, 
human reality is itself apprehended as temporal, and if the 
meaning of its transcendence is its temporality, we can not 
hope to elucidate the being of the for-itself until we have 
described and determined the significance of the Temporal. 
Only then shall we be able to approach the study of the 
problem which concerns us: that of the original relation of 
consciousness to being. 



CHAPTER TWO 


Temporality 


I. PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE THREE 
TEMPORAL DIMENSIONS 


Temporality is evidently an organized structure. The three 
so-called “elements” of time, past, present, and future, should 
not be considered as a collection of “givens” for us to sum 
up — for example, as an infinite series of “nows” in which 
some are not yet and others are no longer — ^but rather as 
the structured moments of an original synthesis. Otherwise 
we will immediately meet with this paradox; the past is no 
longer; the future is not yet; as for the instantaneous pres- 
ent, everyone knows that this does not exist at all but is the 


lunit of an infinite division, like a point without dimension. 
Thus the whole series is annihilated and doubly so since 
the future “now,” for example, is a nothingness qua future 
and will be realized in nothingness when it passes on to the 
state of a present “now.” The only possible method by 
which to study temporality is to approach it as a totality 
which dominates its secondary structures and which confers 
on them their meaning. We will never lose sight of this 
fact Nevertheless we can not launch into an examination 
of the being of Time without a preliminary clarification of 
the too often obscure meaning of the three dimensions by 
means of pre-ontological, phenomenological description. We 
must, however, consider this phenomenological description 



160 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

as merely a provisional work whose goal is only to enable 
us to attain an intuition of temporality as a whole. -In par- 
ticular our description must enable us to see each dimension 
appear on the foundation of temporal totality without our 
ever forgetting the Unselbstdndigkeit of that dimension. 

A. The Past 

Every theory concerning memory implies the presupposition 
of the being of the past. These presuppositions, which have 
never been elucidated, have obscured the problem of mem- 
ory and that of temporality in general. Once and for all we 
must raise the question; what is the being of a, past being? 
Common opinion vacillates between two equally vague con- 
ceptions. The past, it is said, is no longer. From this point 
of view it seems that being is to be attributed to the present 
alone. This ontological presupposition has engendered the 
famous theory of cerebral impressions. Since the past is no 
more, since it has melted away into nothingness, if the 
memory continues to exist, it must be by virtue of a present 
modification of our being; for example, this will be an im- 
print at present stamped on a group of cerebral cells. Thus 
everything is present; the body, the present perception, and 
the past as a present impression in the body — all is actuality; 
for the impression does not have a virtual existence qua 
memory; it is altogether an actual impression. If the mem- 
ory is reborn, it is in the present as the re.sult of a present 
process, as a rupture in the protoplasmic equilibrium in the 
cellular group under consideration. Psycho-physiological par- 
allelism, which is instantaneous and extra-temporal, is there 
to explain how this physiological process is the correlate of 
a phenomenon strictly psychic but equally present — ^the ap- 
pearance of the memory-image in consciousness. The more 
recent idea of an engram adds nothing except that it cloaks 
the theory in a pseudo-scientific terminology. 

But if everything is present, how are we to explain the 
passivity of the memory; that is, the fact that in its inten- 
tion a consciousness which remembers transcends the present 
in order to aim at the event back there where it was. I have 
shown elsewhere that there is no way of distinguishing the 
image from perception if we begin by making the image a 
renascent perception." We shall meet the same impossibili- 

^L’lmaginaUon, 1936. 



TEMPORALITY 


161 


ties here. But in addition we thus remove the method of dis- 
tinguishing the memory from the image; neither the “feeble- 
ness” of the memory, nor its pallor, nor its incompleteness, 
nor the contradictions it shows with the givens of percep- 
tion can distinguish it from a fiction-image since it offers 
the same characteristics. 

Furthermore since these characteristics are present quali- 
ties of the memory, they can not enable us to get out of the ' 
present in order to direct ourselves toward the past. In vain 
will we invoke the memory’s quality of belonging to me — ^its 
“myness,” following Claparede, or its “intimacy,” according to 
James. Either these characteristics manifest only a present at- 
mosphere which envelops the memory — and then they remain 
present and refer to the present, or else they are already a re- 
lation to the past as such — and then they presuppose what 
they must explain. Some scholars have believed they might 
easily get rid of the problem by reducing memory to an im- 
plied pattern of localization and this to an ensemble of intel- 
lectual operations facilitated by the existence of “social con- 
texts of memory.” No doubt these operations exist and ought 
to be the object of psychological investigation. But if the 
relation to the past is not given in some manner, these opera- 
tions can hot create it. In a word, if we begin by isolating 
man on the instantaneous island of his present, and if all his 
modes of being as soon as they appear are destined by nature 
to a perpetual present, we have radically removed all methods 
of understanding his original relation to the past. We shall not 
succeed in constituting the dimension “past” out of elements 
borrowed exclusively from the present any more than “ge- 
neticists” have succeeded in constituting extension from unex- 
tended elements. 

Popular consciousness has so much trouble in refusing a 
real existence to the past that alongside the thesis just dis- 
cussed it admits another conception equally unprecise, ac- 
cording to which the past would have a kind of honorary 
existence. Being past for an event would mean simply being 
r^ired, losing its efficacy without losing its being. Bergson’s 
philosophy has made use of this idea: on going into the past 
event does not cease to be; it merely ceases to act and 
remains “in its place” at its date for eternity. In this way 

cing has been restored to the past, and it is very well 

one; we even affirm that duration is a multiplicity of inter- 



162 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

penetration and that the past is continually organized mth 
the present. But for all that we have not provided any reason 
for this organization and this interpenetration; we have not 
explained how the past can “be reborn” to haunt us, in short 
to exist for us. If it is unconscious, as Bergson claims, and if 
the unconscious is inactive, how can it weave itself into the 
woof of our present consciousness? Would it have a force of 
its own? But then isn’t this force present since it acts on the 
present? How does it emanate from the past as such? Shall we 
reverse the question, as Husserl does, and show in the present 
consciousness a game of “retentions,” which latch on to the 
consciousnesses of yesteryear, maintain them at their date, and 
prevent them from being annihilated? But if Husserl’s cogito 
is first given as instantaneous, there is no way to get outside it 
We saw in the preceding chapter how protentions^ batter in 
vain on the window-panes of the present without shattering 
them. The same goes for retentions. Husserl for the length 
of his philosophical career was haunted by the idea of tran- 
scendence and suipassing. But the philosophical techniques 
at his disposal, in particular his idealist conception of exis- 
tence, removed from him any way of accounting for that tran- 
scendence; his intentionality is o:dy the caricature of it Con- 
sciousness, as Husserl conceived it, can not in reality 
transcend itself either toward the world or toward the future 
or toward the past. 

Thus we have gained nothing by conceding being to the 
past for by the terms of this concession, the past must be for 
us as not-being. Whether the past is, as Bergson and Husserl 
claiin, or is not any longer, as Descartes claims, is hardly of 
any importance if we are to begin by cutting down all bridges 
between it and our present 

^ fact if we confer a privilege on the present by making 
it a presence in the world” we must then attack the problem 
of the past in the perspective of intra-mundane being. People 
consider that we exist first as contemporary with this chair 
or this table, and they work out the meaning of the temporal 
by means of the world. But if we thus place ourselves in 
&e midst of the world, we lose aU possibility of distinguish- 
ing wlmt no longer is from what is not. Someone may object 

at what no longer is must at least have been, whereas what 

of ^ ^ forward dimension of consciousness, the opposite 



TEMPORALITY 


163 


is not has no connection of any kind with being. That is true. 
But the law of being of the intra-mundane instant, as we have 
seen, can be expressed by the simple words, “Being is,” which 
indicate a massive plenitude of positivities where nothing 
which is not can be represented in any way whatsoever, not 
even by an impression, an emptiness, an appeal, or an “hyster- 
esis.” Being which is wholly exhausts itself in being; it has 
nothing to do with what is not, or with what is no longer. No 
negation, whether radical or subdued in a “no longer,” can find 
a place in this absolute density. Hence the past can exist in its 
own way, but the bridges are cut. Being has not even “forgot- 
ten” its past, for forgetting would still be a form of connec- 
tion. T^e past ' has slipped away from it like a dream. 

Descartes’ concept and Bergson’s- can be dismissed side by 
side because they are both subject to the same objection. 
Whether it be a question of annihilating the past or of pre- 
serving for it the existence of a household god, these authors 
have considered its condition apart, isolating it from the 
present. Whatever may be' their concept of consciousness, they . 
have conferred on it the existence of the in-itself; they have' 
considered it as being what it is. There is no reason to won- 
der afterwards that they fail, to reconnect the past to the pres- 
ent, for the present thus conceived will reject the past with 
all its strength. If they had considered the temporal phenom- 
enon in its totality, they would have seen that “my” past is 
first of all mine; that is, that it exists as the function of a 
certain being which I am. The past is not nothing; neither is 
it the present; but at its very source it is bound to a certain 
present and to a certain future, to both of which it belongs. 
That “myness” of which Claparede speaks is not a subjective 
nuance which comes to shatter the memory; it is an ontolog- 
ical relation which unites the past to the present. My past 
never appears isolated in its “pastness”; it would be absurd 
even to imagine that it can exist as such. It is originally the 

past of this present. It is as such that it must be first elu- 
cidated. 

I write that Paul in 1920 was a student at the Polytech- 
nic School. Who is it who “was”? Paul evidently, but what 

K young man of 1920? But the only tense of the 
verb to be” which suits Paul considered in 1920 — so far as 
^ quality of being a Polytechnic student is attributed to him 
« present. In so far as he was, we must say of him — 

® IS. If it is a Paul now -become past who was a student 



164 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

at the Polytechnic School, all connection with the present is 
broken: the man who sustained that qualification, the sub- 
ject, has remained back there with his attribute in 1920. If we 
want remembering to remain possible, v/c must on this 
hypothesis admit a recollecting synthesis which stems from the 
present in order to maintain the contact v/ith the past. This 
is a synthesis impossible to conceive if it is not a mode of 
original being. Failing such a synthesis, we will have to aban- 
don the past to its superb isolation. Moreover what would 
such a division in the personality signify? Proust, of course, 
admits the successive plurality of the Selves but this concept, 
if we take it literally, makes us fall into those insurmountable 
difficulties which in their time the Association School came up 
against. 

Someone perhaps will suggest the hypothesis of a per- 
manence in change; the one who was a pupil at the Poly- 
technic is this same Paul who existed in 1 920 and who exists 
at present. It is he then of whom, after having said, “He is 
a pupil at Polytechnic,” we say at present, “He is a former 
student at the Polytechnic.” But this resort to permanence 
can not get us out of our difficulty. If nothing comes to turn 
the flow of the “nows” backward and so constitute the tem- 
poral series and permanent characteristics within this series, 
then permanence is nothing but a certain instantaneous con- 
tent without even the density of each individual “nov/.” It 
is necessary that there be a past, and consequently something 
or someone who was this past, in order for there to be 
permanence. Far from helping to constitute time, permanence 
presupposes it in order to reveal itself and to reveal change 
along with it. 

We return then to what wc caught a glimpse of earlier. 
If the existential remanence of being in the form of the past 
does not arise originally from my actual present, if my past of 
yesterday does not exist as a transcendence behind my pres- 
ent of today, we have lost all hope of reconnecting the past 
with the present. If then I say of Paul that he was once or that 
he was for a continued period a student at the Polytechnic, I 
am speaking of this same Paul who is at the present time and 
concerning whom I say also that he is now forty years old. It 
IS not the adolescent who was at the Polytechnic, Concern- 
ing the latter, for so long as he was, we have to say: he is. 
It is the forty-year-old who was the student. Actually the 
tmrty-year-old was the student also. But again what would 



TEMPORALITY 


165 


this man of thirty years be without the man of forty who was 
he? It is at the extreme limit of his present that this man of 
forty “was” a student at the Polytechnic. Finally it is the very 
being of the Erlebnis which has the task of .being a man of 
forty, a man of thirty, and an adolescent — all in the mode of 
having been. Concerning this Erlebnis, we say today that it is; 
we say also of the man of forty and of the adolescent in their 
time that they are; today they form a part of the past, and the 
past itself is in the sense that at present it is the past of Paul 
or of this Erlebnis. Thus the particular tenses of the perfect 
indicate beings who all really exist although in diverse modes 
of being, but of which the one is and at the same time was the 
other. The past is characterized as the past of something or of 
somebody; one has a past. It is this instrument, this society, 
this man who have~their past. There is not first a universal 
past which would later' be particularized in concrete pasts. On 
the contrary, it is. particular pasts which we discover first. 
The true problem — ^which we shall attack in the following 
chapter — ^will be to find out by what process these individual 
pasts can be united so as to form the past. 

Someone may object perhaps that we have weighted the 
scale by choosing an example in which the subject who “was” 
still exists in the present. We will cite other cases. For ex- 
ample, I can say of Pierre, who is dead: “He loved music.” 
In this case, the subject like the attribute is past. There is no 
living Pierre in terms of which this past-being can arise. But 
We conceive of such a subject. We conceive of him even to 
the point of recognizing that for Pierre the taste for music 
has never been past. Pierre has always been contemporary 
with this taste, which was his taste; his living personality has 
not survived it, nor has it survived the personality. Conse- 
quently here what is past is Pierre-loving-music. And I can 
pose the question which I raised earlier: of whom is this past 
Pierre Ae past? It can not be in relation to a universal Present 
which is a pure affirmation of being; it is then the past of 
actuality. And in fact Pierre has been for-me, and I have 
been for-him. As we shall see, Pierre’s existence has touched 
luy inmost depths; it formed a part of a present “in-the- 
world, for-me and for-others” which was my present during 
lerre s lifetime — a present which I have been. Thus concrete 
0 jects which have disappeared are past in so far as they form 
^ part of the concrete past of a survivor. “The terrible thing 
^ out Death,” said Malraux, “is that it transforms life into 



166 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

Destiny.” By this we must understand that death reduces the 
for-itself-for-others to the state of simple for-others. Today 
I alone am responsible for the being of the dead Pierre, I in 
my freedom. Those dead who have not been able to be saved 
and transported to the boundaries of the concrete past of a 
survivor are not past; they along with their pasts are annihi- 
lated. 

There are then beings which “have” pasts. Just now we 
referred indifferently to an instrument, a society, a man. Was 
this right? Can we at the outset attribute a past to all finite 
existents or only to certain categories among them? This can 
be more easily determined if we examine more closely this very 
particular notion — “to have” a past. One can not “have” a 
past as one “has” an automobile or a racing stable. That is, 
the past can not be possessed by a present being which re- 
mains strictly external to it as I remain, for example, external 
to my fountain pen. In short, in the sense that possession 
ordinarily expresses an external relation of the possessor to the 
possessed, the expression of possession is madequate. External 
relations would hide an impassable abyss between a past and a 
present which would then be two factual givens without real 
communication. Even the absolute interpenetration of the pres- 
ent by the past, as Bergson conceives it, does not resolve the 
difficulty because this interpenetration, which is the organiza- 
tion of the past with the present, comes ultimately from the 
past itself and is only a relation of habitation. The past can 
indeed be conceived as being in the present, but by making 
it such we have removed all ways of presenting this imma- 
nence other than like that of a stone at the bottom of the river. 
The past indeed can haunt the present but it can not be the 
present; it is the present which is its past. 

Therefore if we study the relations of the past to the 
present in terms of the past, we shall never establish internal 
relations between them. Consequently an in-itself, whose pres- 
ent is what it is, can not “have” a past. The examples, cited 
by Chevallier in support of his thesis, and in particular the 
facts of hysteresis, do not allow us to establish any action by 
the past of matter upon its present state. There is no one of 
these examples, in fact, which can not be explained by the 
ordmary means of mechanistic deter mini s m . Of these two 
nails, Chevallier tells us, the one has just been made and has 
nev^ een used, the other has been bent, then straightened by 
strokes of the hammer; they appear absolutely similar. Yet at 



TEMPORALITY 


167 


\ 


the first blow the one will sink straight into the wall, and the 
other will be bent again; this is the action of the past. Accord- 
ing to our view, a little bad faith is needed in order to see the 
action of the past in this example. In place of this unintel- 
ligible explanation in terms of being which here is density, we 
may easily substitute the only possible^ explanation: the ex- 
ternal appearances of these nails are similar, but their present 
molecular structures perceptibly differ. The present molecular 
state is at each instant the strict result of the prior molecular 
state, which for the scientist certainly does not mean 
that there is a “passage” from one instant to the next within 
the permanence of the past but merely an irreversible relation 
between the contents of two instants of physical time. Simi- 
larly, to offer as proof of this permanence of the past the 
remanence of magnetization in a piece of soft iron is not to 
prove anything worthwhile. Here we are with a phenomenon 
which outlives its cause, not with a subsistence of the cause 
qua cause in the past state. For a long time after the stone 
which pierced the water has fallen to the bottom of the sea, 
concentric waves still pass over its surface; here nobody makes 
an appeal to some sort of action by the past to explain this 
phenomenon; the mechanism of it is almost visible. It does 
not seem that the facts of hysteresis or of remanence need 
any explanation of a different type. 

In fact it is very clear that the expression “to have a past,” 
which leads us to suppose a mode of possession in which the 
possessor can be passive and which as such can without vio- 
lence be applied to matter, should be replaced by the expres- 
sion “to be its own past.” There is a past only for a present 
which can not exist without being its past — back there, behind 
itself; that is, only those beings have a past which are such 
that in their being, their past being is in question, those 
beings who have to be their past. These observations enable us 
to refuse a priori to grant a past to the in-itself (which does 
not mean, however, that we must confine it within the pres- 
ent), We shall not thus settle once and for all the question of 
the past of living beings. We shall only observe that if it were 
necessary — ^which is by no means certain — ^to grant a past to 
ffe, this could be done only after having proved that the being 
of life is such that it allows a past. In short, it would be neces- 
sary first to prove that living matter is something other than a 
physical-chemical system. The opposite attempt — that of Che- 
V ler which consists in putting the strongest emphasis on the 



168 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

past as constitutive of originality in life, is an vcrrepov rponpov 
completely void of meaning. For Human Reality alone the ex- 
istence of a past is manifest because it has been established 
that human reality has to be what it is. It is through the for- 
itself that the past arrives in the world because its “I am” is 
in the form of an I am me. 

What then is the meaning of “was”? We see first of all 
that it is transitive. If I say, “Paul is fatigued ” one might 
perhaps argue that the copula has an ontological value, one 
might perhaps want to see there only an indication of inher- 
ence. But when we say, “Paul was fatigued,” the essential 
meaning of the “was” leaps to our eyes: the present Paul is 
actually responsible for having had this fatigue in the past. If 
he were not sustaining this fatigue with his being, he would 
not even have forgotten that state; there would be rather a 
“no-longer-being” strictly identical with a “not-being.” The 
fatigue would be lost. The present being therefore is the 
foundation of its own past; and it is the present’s char- 
acter as a foundation which the “was” manifests. But we are 
not to understand that the present founds the past in the 
mode of indifference and without being profoundly modified 
by it. “Was” means that the present being has to be in its 
being the foundation of its past while being itself this past. 
What does this mean? How can the present be the past? 

The crux of the question lies evidently in the term “was,” 
which, serving as intermediary between the present and the 
past, is itself neither wholly present nor wholly past. In fact it 
can be neither the one nor the other since in either case it 
would be contained inside the tense which would denote its 
being. The term “was” indicates the ontological leap from 
the present into the past and represents an original synthesis 
of these two temporal modes. What must we understand by 
this synthesis? 

I see first that the term “was” is a mode of being. In this 
sense I am my past. I do not have it; I am it. A remark 
made by someone concerning an act which I performed 
yesterday or a mood which I had does not leave me indiffer- 
ent; I am hurt or flattered, I protest or I let it pass; I am 
touched to the quick. I do not dissociate myself from my past. 
Of course, in time I can attempt this dissociation; I can de- 
clare that "I am no longer what I was,” argue that there has 

een a ch^ge, progress. But this is a matter of a secondary 
reaction which is given as such. To deny my solidarity of 



TEMPORALITY 


169 


being with my past at this or that particular point is to affirm 
it for the whole of my life. At my limit, at that infinitesimal 
instant of my death, I shall be no more than my past. It alone 
will define me. This is what Sophocles wants to express in the 
Trachinae when he has Deianeira say, “It is a proverb 
current for a long time among men that one can not pass 
judgment on the life of mortals and say if it has been happy 
or unhappy, until their death.” This is also the meaning of 
that sentence of Malraux’ w^ich we quoted earlier; “Death 
changes life into Destiny.” Finally this is what strikes the 
Believer when he realizes with terror that at the moment of 
death the chips are down, there remains not a card to play. 
Death reunites us with ourselves. Eternity has changed us into 
ourselves. At the moment of death we are; that is, we are de- 
fenceless before the judgments of others. They can decide 
in truth what we are; ultimately we have no longer any 
chance of escape from what an all knowing intelligence could 
do. A last hour repentance is a desperate effort to crack all 
this being which^ has slowly congealed and solidified around 
us, a final leap to dissociate ourselves from what we are. In 
vain. Death fixes this leap along with the rest; it does no more 
than to enter into combination with what has preceded it, as 
one factor among others, as one particular determination 
which is understood only in terms of the totality. By death 
the for-itself is changed forever into an in-itself in that it 
has slipped entirely into the past. Thus the past is the ever 
growing totality of the in-itself which we are. 

Nevertheless so long; as we are not dead, we are not this 
in-itself in the mode of identity. We have to be it. Or- 
dinarily a grudge against a man ceases with his death; this 
is because he has been reunited with his past; he is it without, 
however, being responsible for it. So long as he lives, he is 
the object of my grudge; that is, I reproach him for his past 
not only in so far as he is it but in so far as he reassumes it 
nt each instant and sustains it in being, in so far as he is 
responsible for it. It is not true that the grudge fixes the man 
in what he was; otherwise it would survive death. It is ad- 
ressed to the living man who in his being is freely what he 
was. I am my past and if I were not, my past would not 
exist any longer either for me or for anybody. It would no 
onger have any relation with the present. That certainly does 
no mean that it would not be, but only that its being would 
e nndiscoverable. I am the one by whom my past arrives in 



170 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

this world. But it must be understood that I do not give 
being to it. In other words it does not exist as “my” represen- 
tation. It is not because I “represent” my past that it exists. 
But it is because I am my past that it enters into the world, 
and it is in terms of its being-in-the-world that I can by 
applying a particular psychological process represent it to 
myself. 

The past is what I have to be, and yet its nature is different 
from that of my possibles. The possible, which also 1 
have to be, remains as my concrete possible, that whose oppo- 
site is equally possible — although to a less degree. The past, 
on the contrary, is that which is without possibility of any 
sort; it is that which has consumed its possibilities. 1 have to 
be that which no longer depends on my being-able-to-be, that 
which is already in itself all which it can be. The past which 
I am, I have to be with no possibility of not being it. I assume 
the total responsibility for it as if I could change it, and yet 
I can not be anything other than it We shall see later that we 
continually preserve the possibility of changing the meaning 
of the past in so far as this is an ex-present which has had a 
future. But from the content of the past as such I can remove 
nothing, and I can add nothing to it In other words the past 
which / was is what it is; it is an m-itself like the things in 
the world. The relation of being which I have to sustain with 
the past is a relation of the type of 'the in-itself — that is, an 
identification with itself. 

On the other hand I am not my past. I am not it because 
I was it. The malice of others always surprises me and 
makes me indignant How can they hate in the person who I 
am now that person who I was? The wisdom of antiquity has 
always insisted on this fact: I can make no pronouncement on 
myself which has not already become false at the moment 
when I pronounce it. Hegel did not disdain to employ this 
argument. Whatever I am .doing, whatever I am saying — 
at the moment when I wish to be it, already I was doing it, I 
was saying it. But let us, examine this aphorism more carefully. 
It amounts to saying that every judgment which I make con- 
cerning myself is already false when I make it; that is, that I 
have becom<5 something else. But what are we to understand 
by this something else? If we understand by it a mode of hu- 
man reality which would enjoy the same existential type as 
mat to which we refuse present existence, this amounts to 

ec anng that we have committed an error in attributing a 


TEMPORALITY 171 

predicate to the subject and that there remains another pred- 
icate which could be attributed; it would only have been 
necessary to aim at it in the immediate future. In the same 
way a hunter who aims at a bird there -where he sees it misses 
it because the bird is no longer at that place when the bullet 
arrives there. He will hit the bird if, on the contrary, he aims 
a little in advance at a point where the flying bird has not 
yet arrived. If the bird is no longer at this place, it is because 
it is already at another. At all events it is somewhere. But we 
shall see that this Eleatic concept of motion is profoundly 
erroneous; if we can say that the arrow is at A, B, etc., then 
motion really is a succession of points at rest. Similarly if we 
conceive that there has been an infinitesimal instant no longer 
existing at which I was what I already no longer am, then we 
are constituting the “me” out of a series of fixed states which 
succeed each other like images from a magic lantern. If I am 
nof what I pronounced myself to be, this is not because of 
a slight cleavage betweeH judicative thought and being, not 
because of a retardation between the judgment and the fact, 
but because on principle in my immediate being in the pres- 
ence of my present, I am not it. In short the reason why I 
am not what I was is not that there is a change, a becoming 
conceived as a passage to heterogeneity taking place in the 
homogeneity of being; on the contrary, a becoming is possible 
there only because on principle my being and my modes 
of being are heterogeneous. 

The explanation of the world by means of becoming, 
conceived as a synthesis of being and of non-being, is easily 
given. But it must be noted that being in becoming could be 
this synthesis only if it were so to itself in an act which 
would establish its own nothingness. If already I am no longer 
what I was, it is still necessary that I have to be so in the 
unity of a nihilating synthesis which I myself sustain in 
being; otherwise I would have no relation of any sort with 
what I am no longer, and my full positivity would be exclu- 
sive of the non-being essential to becoming. Becoming can not 
be a^ given, a mode of immediate being for being; if we con- 
ceive of such a being, then being and non-being would be 
only juxtaposed in its heart, and no imposed or external 
s ructure could melt them into each other, bond between 
uon-being can be only internal. Tt Is within being 
non-being must arise, and within non-bcing 

at bemg must spring up; and this relation can not be a fact, 


172 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


a natural law, but an upsurge of the being which is its own 
nothingness of being. If then I am not my own past, this can 
not be in the original mode of becoming; the truth is that 
I have to be it in order not to be it and I have not to be it in 
order to be it. This ought to clarify for us the nature of the 
mode “was”; if I am not what I was, it is not because I have 
already changed, which would suppose a time already given, 
but because I am related to my being in the mode of an 
internal bond of non-being. 

"Hius it is in so far as I am my past that I can not-be it; 
it is even this very necessity of being my past which is the 
only possible foundation of the fact that I am not it Other- 
wise at each instant I should neither be it nor not be it save 
in the eyes of a strictly external witness who, moreover, would 
himself have to be his past in the mode of non-being. 

These remarks can show us that there is something in- 
exact in that scepticism of Heraclitean origin which insists 
solely on the fact that I already no longer am what I say I 
am. Of course, no matter what someone says that I am, I 
am not it. But it is incorrect to affirm that I am already no 

^ ^ here “being in 

Itself. On the other hand, neither does it follow that I am 
makmg an error in saying that I am it, since it is very 
necessapr that I be it in order not to be it: I am it in the 
mode of was.” 


. whatever I can be said to be in the sense of being- 

n 1 se with a full, compact density (he is quick-tempered, 
he IS a ci^^ servant, he is dissatisfied) is always /ny pj. It is 

^ ^ hand, that 

dSrf absolute 

k ""T ’ connections. If I was happy 

it does nnt ^®ans that I am not happy. But 

L hannrnnr?\?^' ^ i^^it simply that I can 

I thus carrv mvV because I have a past that 

and onlPJhM be^d me; rather the past is precisely 

what I am from A which obliges me to be 

-f behind. This is the meaning of the “was ” Bv 

Obligltl of a^umiS 
its Line’ onfv hr"" except for itself. It can assume 

J^ncftrZ It teioTIvIhf ‘ P"'' “ “ 

in the mode of th • -f" tc affirmation that I am 

the mode of the in-itself, I escape that affirmation, for in 



TEMPORALITY 


173 


its very nature it implies a negation. Thus the for-itself is 
always beyond That which it is by the very fact that it is it 
for-itself and that it has to be it. But at the same time the 
being which lives behind it is indeed its being, and not an- 
other being. Thus we understand the meaning of the “was,” 
which meirely characterizes the type of being of the for-itself 
— i.e., the relation of Ae for-itself to its being. The past is the 
in-itself which I am, but I am this in-itself as surpassed. 

It remains for us to study the specific way in which the 
for-itself “was” its own past. Now we know that the for-itself 
appears in the original act by which the in-itself nihilates 
itself in order to foimd itself. The for-itself is its own founda- 
tion in so far as it makes itself the failure of the in-itself to be 
its own foundation. But for all that the for-itself has not suc- 
ceeded in freeing itself from the in-itself. The surpassed in-it-' 
self lives on and haunts the for-itself as its original contingency. 
The for-itself can never reach the in-itself nor apprehend 
itself as being this or that, but neither can it prevent it- 
self from being what it is — at a distance from itself. This 
'contingency of the for-itself, this weight surpassed and pre- 
served in the very surpassing — ^this is Facticity. But it is also 
the past. “Facticity” and “Past” are two words to indicate one 
and the same thing. The Past, in fact, like Facticity, is the 
invulnerable contingency of the in-itself which I have to be, 
without any possibility of not being it. It is the inevitability 
of the necessity of fact, not by virtue of necessity but by 
virtue of fact. It is the being of fact, which can not deter- 
mme the content of my motivations but which paralyzes them 
with its contingency because they can neither suppress it nor 
change it; it is what they necessarily carry with them in order 
to modify it, what they preserve in order to flee it, what 
they have to be in their very effort not to be it; it is that in 
terms of which they make themselves what they are. It is this 
bemg wWch is responsible for the fact that each instant I am 
not a diplomat or a sailor, that I am a professor, although I 
can only play this being as a role and although I can never 
be united with it. If I can not re-enter into the past, it is not 
because some magical power puts it beyond my reach but 
^ply because it is in-itself and because I am for-myself. 

he past is what I am without being able to live it The past is 
su stance. In this sense the Cartesian cogito ought to be 
° rather: “I think; therefore I was.” 

hat deceives us is the apparent homogeneity of the past 


174 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

and the present. For that shame which I experienced yester- 
day was part of the for-itself when I experienced it. We be- 
lieve then that it has remained for-itself today; we wrongly 
conclude that if I can not re-enter it, this is because it no 
longer exists. But we must reverse the relation in order to 
reach the truth. Between past and present there is an absolute 
heterogeneity; and if I can not enter the past, it is because 
the past is. The only way by which I could be it is for me 
myself to become in-itself in order to lose myself in it in the 
form of identification; this by definition is denied me. In 
fact that shame which I experienced yesterday and which was 
shame for itself is always shame in the present, and its essence 
can still be described as for-itself. But its being is no longer 
for itself since it no longer exists as reflection-reflecting. 
Though capable of description as for-itself, it simply is. The 
past is given as a for-itself become in-itself. That shame, so 
long as I live it, is not what it is. Now that I it, I can 
say: it was shame. It has become what it was — ^behind me. It 
has the permanence and the constancy of the in-itself; it is at 
its date for eternity; it has the total adherence of the in-itself 
to itself. 

In one sense then the past, which is at the same time 
for-itself and in-itself, resembles value or self, which we de- 
scribed in the preceding chapter; for it represents a certain 
synthesis of the being which is what it is not and is not 
what it is — ^with the being which is what it is. It is in this 
sense that we can speak of the evanescent value of the past. 
Hence arises the fact that memory presents to us the being 
which we were, accompanied by a plenitude of being which 
confers on it a sort of poetry. That grief which we /zacf— al- 
though fixed in the past — does not cease to present the mean- 
ing of a for-itself, and yet it exists in itself with the sUent 
fixity of the grief of another, of the grief of a statue. It no 
longer needs to appear before itself in order to make itself 
exist. On the contrary it is its character of for-itself; far from 
being the mode of being of its being, it becomes simply one 
way of being, a quality. Psychologists because they contem- 
plated the psychic state in the past have claimed that con- 
sciousness was a quality which could affect the psychic state 
or not without modifying it in its being. The past psychic 

first is; and then it is for itself — ^just as Pierre is blond, as that 
'' tree is an oak. 

But precisely for this reason the past which resembles 



TEMPORALITY 


175 


value is not value. In value the for-itself becomes itself by 
surpassing and by founding its being; there is a recovery of 
the in-itself by the self. As a result, the contingency of being 
gives way to necessity. The past on the contrary is at the start 
m-itself. The for-itself is sustained in being by the in-itself; 
its raison d’etre is no longer being for-itself. It has become 
in-itself, and as a result it appears to us in its pure contin- 
gency. There is no reason for our past to be this or that; it 
appears in the totality of its series as the pure fact for which 
we must account qua fact, as the gratuitous. In short, it is 
value reversed— the for-itself recovered by the in-itself and 
fixed by it, penetrated and blinded by the full density of the 
in-itself, thickened by the in-itself to the point of no longer 
being able to exist as a reflection for the reflecting nor as the 
reflecting for the reflection, but simply as an in-itself indica- 
tion of the dyad reflecting-reflection. This is why the past 
can, if need be, be the object aimed at by a for-itself which 
wants to realize value and flee the anguish which comes to it 
from the perpetual absence of the self. But in essence it is 
radically distinct from value; it is precisely the indicative 
from which no imperative can be deduced; it is the unique 
fact for each for-itself, the contingent and unalterable fact 
which I was. 

Thus the Past is a For-itself reapprehended and inundated 
by the In-itself. How can this happen? We have described the 
meaning of being-past for an event and of having a past for a 
human reality. We have seen that the Past is an ontological 
law of the For-itself; that is, everything which can be a For- 
itself must be it back there behind itself, out of reach. It is 
in this sense that we can accept the statement of Hegel: 
*Wesen ist was gewesen ist.” My essence is in the past; the 
past is the law of its being. But we have not explained why a 
concrete event of the For-itself becomes past. How does a 
For-itself which was its past become the Past which a new 
For-itself has to be? The passage to the past is a modification 
of being. What is this modification? In order to understand 
wis we must first apprehend the relation of the present For- 

tlf n Thus as we might have foreseen, the study of 

me Past refers us to that of the Present. 

B. The ^resent 

^ contrast to the Past which is in-itself, the Present is for- 
• 0 . What is its being? There is a peculiar paradox in the 


176 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

Present: On the one hand, we willingly define it as being; 
what is present is — ^in contrast to the future which is not 
yet and to the past which is no longer. But on the other hand, 
a rigorous analysis which would attempt to rid the present of 
all which is not it— i.e., of the past and of the imme^ate 
future — would find that nothing remained but an infinitesi- 
mal instant. As Husserl remarks in his Essays on the Inner 
Consciousness of Time, the ideal limit of a division pushed to 
infini ty is a nothingness. Thus each time that we approach 
the study of human reality from a new point of view we re- 
discover that indissoluble dyad. Being and Nothingness. 

What is the fundamental meaning of the Present? It is 
clear that what exists in the present is distinguished from aU 
other existence by the characteristic of presence. At roll caU 
the soldier or the pupil replies “Present!” in the sense of 
adsum. Present is opposed to absent as well as to past. Thus 

the meaning of present is presence to . It is appropriate 

then to ask ourselves to what the present is presence and who 
or what is present. That will doubtless enable us to elucidate 
subsequently the very being of the present. 

My present is to be present Present to what? To this 
table, to this room, to Paris, to the world, in short to 
being-in-itself. But can we say conversely that being-in-itself is 
present to me and to the being-in-itself which it is not? If 
that were so, the present would be a reciprocal relation of 
. , presences. But it is easy to see that it is nothing of the sort. 

Presence to ^is an internal relation between the being 

which is present and the beings to which it is present. In any 
case it can not be a matter of a simple external relation of 
contiguity. Presence to vindicates existence outside one- 
self near to Anything which can be present to — * 

must be such in its being that there is in it a relation of being 
with other beings. I can be present to this chair only if I am 
united to it in an ontological relation of synthesis, only if I 
am there in the being of the chair as not being the chair. A 

being which is present to can not be at rest “in-itself”; 

the in-itself can not be present any more than it can be Past. It 
simply is. There can be no question of any kind of simul- 
taneity between one in-itself and another in-itself except from 
the point of view of a being which would be co-present with 
which would have in it the power of pres- 
®ce. The Present therefore can be only the presence of the 

or-itself to being-in-itself. And this presence can not be the 



TEMPORALITY 


177 


effect of an accident, of a concomitance; on the contrary it 
is presupposed by all concomitance, and it must be an ontolog- 
ies structure of the For-itself. This table must be present to 
that chair in a world which human reality haunts as a pres- 
ence. In other words one cannot conceive of a type of existent 
which would be first For-itself in order subsequently to be 
present to being. But the For-itself makes itself presence to 
being by making itself be For-itself, and it ceases to be 
presence by ceasing to be for-itself. The For-itself is defined 
as presence to being. 

To what being - does the For-itself make itself presence? 
The answer is clear: the For-itself is presence to all of being- 
in-itself. Or rather the presence of the For-itself is what 
makes being-in-itself exist as a totality. For by this very mode 
of presence to being qua being, every possibility is removed 
whereby the For-itself might be more present to one 
privileged being than to all other beings. Even though the 
facticity of its existence causes it to be there rather than else- 
where, being there is not the same as being present. Being 
there determines only the perspective by which presence to the 
totality of the in-itself is realized. By means of the there the 
For-itself causes beings to be for one and the same presence. 
Beings are revealed as co-present in a world where the For-it- 
self unites them with its own blood by that total ekstatic sac- 
rifice of the self which is called presence. “Before” the sacrifice 
of the For-itself it would have been impossible to say 
that beings existed either together or separated. But the For- 
itself is the being by which the present enters into the world; 
the beings of the world are co-present, in fact, just in so far 
as one and the same for-itself is at the same time present to all 
of them. Thus for the in-itselfs what we ordinarily call Present 
is sharply distinguished from their being although it is 
nothing more than their being. For their Present means only 
their co-presence in so far as a For-itself is present to them. 

_ We know now what is present and to what the present 
IS present. But what is presence? 

We have seen that this can not be the pure co-existence 
of two existents, conceived as a simple relation of exteriority, 
or that would require a third term to establish the co-exis- 
tence. ’niis third term exists in the case of the co-existence of 

logs in the midst of the world; it is the For-itself which 
establishes this co-existence by making itself co-present to all. 



BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


178 


\ 


But in the case of the Presence of the For-itself to being-in- 
itself, there can not be a third term. No witness — ^not even 
God — could establish that presence; even the For-itself can 
know it only if the presence already is. Nevertheless presence 
can not be in the mode of the in-itself. This means that orig- 
inally the For-itself is presence to being in so far as the 
For-itself is to itself its ovm witness of co-existence. How are 
we to understand this? We know that the For-itself is the 
being which exists in the form of a witness of its being. Now 
the For-itself is present to being if it is intentionally di- 
rected outside itself upon that being. And it must adhere 
to being as closely as is possible without identification. 
This adherence, as we shall see in the next chapter, is realis- 
tic, due to the fact that the For-itself realizes its birth in an 
original bond with being; it is a witness to itself of itself as 
not being that being. Due to this fact it is outside that being, 
upon being and within being as not being that being. 

In addition we can deduce the following conclusions as to 
Ae meaning of Presence: Presence to a being implies that one 
is bound to that being by an internal bond; otherwise no 
connection between Present and being would be possible. But 
this internal bond is a negative bond and denies, as related 
to the present being, that one is the being to which one is 
present. If this were not so, the internal bond would dissolve 
into pure and simple identification. Thus the For-itselTs Pres- 


ence to being implies that the For-itself is a witness of itself 
in the presence of being as not being that being; presence to 
being is the presence of the For-itself in so far as the For-itself 
is not. For the negation rests not on a difference in mode of 
being which would distinguish the For-itself from being but 
on a difference of being. This can be expressed briefly by 
saying that the Present is not. 


^^at is meant by this non-being of the Present and of 
the^ For-itself? To grasp this we must return to the For-itself, 
to its mode of existing, and outline briefly a description of its 
ontological relation to being. Concerning the For-itself as 
sue we should never say, “It is,“ in the sense that we say, for 
examp e, t is nine o clock”; that is, in the sense of the total 
j itself which posits and suppresses 

external aspect of passivity. For 
a existence of an appearance coupled with 

ss o a reflection which refers to a reflecting without 



TEMPORALITY 


179 


there being any object of which the reflection would be the 
reflection. The For-itself does not have being because its 
being is always at a distance: its being is there in the reflect- 
ing, if you consider appearance, which is appearance or re- 
flection only for the reflecting; it is there in the reflection if 
you consider the reflecting, which is no longer in itself any- 
thing more than a pure function of reflecting this reflection. 
Furthermore in itself the For-itself is not being, for it makes 
itself be explicitly for-itself as not being being. It is conscious- 
ness of as the internal negation of . The struc- 

ture at the basis of intentionality and of selfness is the negation, 
which is the internal relation of the For-itself to the thing. 
The For-itself constitutes itself outside in terms of the thing 
as the negation of that thing; thus its first relation with 
being-in-itself in negation. It “is” in the mode of the For- 
itself; that is, as a separated existent inasmuch as it reveals 
itself as not being being. It doubly escapes being, by an in- 
ternal disintegration and by express negation. The present is 
precisely this negation of being, this escape from being inas- 
much as being is there as that from which one escapes. The 
For-itself is present to being in the form of flight; the Pres- 
ent is a perpetual flight in the face of being. Thus we have 
precisely defined the fundamental meaning of the Present: 
the Present is not. The present instant emanates from a realis- 
tic and reifying conception of the For-itself; it is this concep- 
tion which leads us to denote the For-itself according to the 
mode of that which is and that to which it is present — ^for ex- 
ample, of that hand on the face of the clock. In this sense 
it would be absurd to say that it is nine o’clock for the For- 
itself, but the For-itself can be present to a hand pointed at 
nine o’clock. What we falsely call the Present is the being to 
which the present is presence. It is impossible to grasp the 
Present in the form of an instant, for the instant would be 
the moment when the present is. But the present is not; it 
makes itself present in the form of flight. 

But the present is not only the For-itself s non-being mak- 
ing itself present. As For-itself it has its being outside of it, 
before and behind. Behind, it was its past; and before, it will 
be its future. It is a flight outside of co-present being and 
from the being which it was toward the being which it will 
be. At present it is not what it is (past) and it is what it 
is not (future) . Here then we are referred to the Future. 


180 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 
C. The Future 


Let us note first that the in-itself can neither be future nor 
contain a part of the future. The full moon is future only 
when I regard this crescent moon as “in the world” which is 
revealed to human reality: it is only by human reality that the 
Future arrives in the world. In itself Ais quarter of the moon 
is what it is. Nothing in it is potentiality. It is actuality. The 
future, like the past, does not exist as a phenomenon of that 
original temporality of being-in-itself. The future of the in- 
itself, if it existed, would exist in-itself, cut off from being — 
like the past. Even if we should admit with Laplace a total 
determinism which allowed us to foresee a future state, still it 
would be necessary that this future circumstance be outlined 
on a preliminary revelation of the future as such, on a being- 
to-come of the world — or else time is an illusion and chro- 
nology disguises a strictly logical order of deducibility. If the 
future is pre-outlined on the horizon of the world, this can be 
only by a being which is its own future; that is, which is to- 
come for itself, whose being is constituted by a coming-to- 
itself of its own being. Here again we discover ekstatic struc- 
tures analogous to those which we have described for the 
Past. Only a being which has to be its being instead of simply 
being it can have a future. 


But what exactly is meant by “being its future”? And 
what type of being does the future possess? We must abandon 
at the start the idea that the future exists as representation.^ 
m the first place the future is seldom “represented.” When it 
is, then as Heidegger says, it is thematized and ceases to be 
my future m order to become the indifferent object of my 
representation. Finally, if it were represented,. it could not be 
the content” of my representation, for content, if there were 
any, would have to be present. Someone may say that this 
Resent content will be animated by a “futurizing” intention. 

pith j sense. Even if that intention existed, 

either it would itself of necessity be present-^and then the 

° ® future is not capable of any solution; or else 

thp transcends the present in the future, and then 

rerno ■ ^ ° ^ Mtention is to-come, and it is necessary to 

nerrfrrv ^ different from the simple 

^ For-itself were limited within its 
ir. i.e., in the imagination. 



TEMPORALITY 


181 


present, how could it represent the future to itself? How 
could it have either knowledge of it or presentiment? No 
fabricated idea could furnish an equivalent for it. Once we 
have confined the Present to the Present, it is evident that we 
will never get out of it. It would be of no use to describe 
the Present as “pregnant with the future.” Either this expres- 
sion means nothing, or it denotes an actual eflBcacy in the 
present, or it indicates the law of being of the For-itself as 
that which is its future to itself — and in this last case it only 
points out what must be described and explained. The For- 
itself can not be “pregnant with the future” nor “expectant 
of the future,” nor can it be “a knowledge of the future” ex- 
cept on the basis of an original and prejudicative relation 
of itself to itself. We can not conceive for the For-itself the 
sfightest possibility of a thematic foresight, not even that of 
determined states in a scientific universe, unless it is the 
being which comes to itself in terms of the future, the being 
which makes itself exist as having its being outside itself in 
the future. 

Let us take a - simple example. This position which I 
quickly assume on the tennis court has meaning only through 
the movement which I shall make immediately afterward with 
my racket in order to return the ball over the net. But I am 
not obeying the “clear representation” of the future motion 
nor the “firm will” to accomplish it. Representations and 
volitions are idols invented by the psychologists. It is the 
future motion which, without even being thematically 
posited, hovers in the background of the positions which I - 
adopt, so as to clarify them, to link them, and to modify 
them. At one throw, as I am there on the court and returning 
the ball, I exist first as a lack to myself, and the intermediary 
positions which I adopt are only ways of uniting myself with 
that future state so as to merge with it; each position has 
meaning only through that future state. There is in my con- 
sciousness no moment which is not similarly defined by an 
internal relation to a future; when I .write, when I smoke, 
when I drink, when I rest, the meaning of my conscious 
states is always at a distance, down there, outside. In this 
sense Heidegger is right in saying that the Dasein is 
“always infinitely more than it woidd be if we limited it to its 
pure present.” Better yet, this limitation would be impossible, 
for we would then be making the Present into an In-itself. 
Thus finality is rightly said to be causality reversed--that Js, 



182 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

the efficacy of the future state. But too often people have for- 
gotten to take this formula literally. 

We must not understand by the future a “now” which is 
not yet. If we did so, we should fall back into the in-itself, 
and even worse we should have to envisage time as a given 
and static container. The future is what I have to be in so 
far as I can not be it. Let us recall that the For-itself makes 
itself present before being as not being this being and as 
having been its own being in the past This presence is flight 
We are not dealing here with a belated presence at rest near 

being but with an escape outside of being toward 

And this flight is twofold, for in fleeing the being which it 
is not, Presence flees the being which it was. Toward what is 
it fleeing? We must not forget that in so far as it makes itself 
present to being in order to flee it the For-itself is a lack. 
The possible is that which the For-itself lacks in order to be 
itself or, if you prefer, the appearance of what 1 am — at a 
distance. Thus we grasp the meaning of the flight which is 
Presence; it is a flight toward its being; that is, toward the 
self which it will be by coincidence with what it lacks. The 
Future is the lack which wrenches it as lack away from 
the in-itself of Presence. If Presence did not lack anything, it 
would fall back into being and would lose presence to being 
and acquire in exchange the isolation of complete identity. It 
is lack as such which permits it to be presence. Because Pres- 
ence is outside of itself toward something lacking which is 
bey^ond the world, it can be outside itself as presence to an 
in-itself which it is not. 

The Future is the determining being which the For-itself 
has to be beyond being. There is a Future because the For- 
itself has to be its being instead of simply being it. This 
being which the For-itself has to be can not be in the mode of 
the co-present in-itselfs; for in that case it would be without 
being made-to-be; we could not then imagine it as a completely 
defined state to which presence alone would be lacking, 
as Kant says that existence adds nothing more to the ob- 
ject of the concept. But this being would no longer be able 
to exist, for in that case the For-itself would be only a given. 
This being is because the For-itself makes itself be by per- 
petually apprehending itself for itself as unachieved in relation 
to it. It is this which at a distance haunts the dyad reflection- 
reflecting and which causes the reflection to be apprehended 
by the reflecting (and conversely) as a Not-yet. But it is 



TEMPORALITY 


183 


necessary that this lacking be given in the unity of a single 
upsurge with the For-itself which lacks; otherwise there would 
be nothing in relation to which the For-itself might appre- 
hend itself as not-yet The Future is revealed to the For-itself 
as that which the For-itself is not yet, inasmuch as the For- 
itself constitutes itself non-thetically for itself as a not-yet in 
the perspective of this revelation, and inasmuch as it makes 
itself be as a project of itself outside the Present toward that 
which it is not yet. To be sure, the Future can not be without 
this revelation. This revelation itself requires being revealed 
to itself; that is, it requires the revelation of the For-itself to 
itself, for otherwise the ensemble revelation-revealed would 
fall into the unconscious — i.e., into the In-itself. Thus only a 
being which is its own revealed to itself — ^that is, whose 
being is in question for itself — can have a Future. But 
conversely such a being can be for itself only in the perspective 
of a Not-yet, for it apprehends itself as a nothingness — ^that 
is, as a being whose complement of being is at a distance 
from itself. At a distance means beyond being. Thus every-- 
thing which the For-itself is beyond being is the Future. 

What is the meaning of this “beyond”? In order to 
understand it we must note that the Future has one essentid 
characteristic of the For-itself: it is presence (future) to 
being. And it is Presence of this particular For-itself, of the 
For-itself for which it is the future. When I say, ‘7 shall 
be happy,” it is this present For-itself which will be happy; 
it is the actual Erlebnis with all' which it was and which 
it drags behind it. It will be happy as presence to being; 
that is, as future Presence of the For-itself to a co-future 
being. So that what has been given me as the meaning of the 
present For-itself is ordinarily the co-future being in so far as 
it will be revealed to the future For-itself as that to which this 
For-itself will be present. For the For-itself is the thetic con- 
sciousness of the world in the form of presence and non-thetic 
self-consciousness. Thus what is ordinarily revealed to con- 
sciousness is the future world without consciousness’ being 
aware that it is the world in so far as it will appear to a con- 
sciousness, the world in so far as it is posited as future by the 
presence of a For-itself to come. This world has meaning as 
future only in so far as I am present to it as another who I 
be, in another position, physical, emotional, social, etc. 
^et it is this which is at the end of my present For-itself and 
beyond being-in-itself, and this is the reason why we have a 


184 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

tendency first to present the future as a state of the world and 
to make it appear subsequently on the ground of the world. 

~ If I write, I am conscious of the words as written and as about 
to be written. The words alone seem to be the future which 
awaits me. But the very fact that they appear as to be written 
implies that writing, as a non-thetic self-consciousness, is 
the possibility which I am. Thus the Future as the future pres- 
ence of a For-itself to a being drags being-in -itself along 
with it into the future. This being to which the For-itself 
will be present is the meaning of the in-itsclf co-present with 
the present For-itself, as the future is the meaning of the 
For-itself. The Future is presence to a co-future being because 
the For-itself can exist only outside itself at the side of being 
and because the future is a future For-itself. But thus through 
the Future a particular future arrives in the World; that is, 
the For-itself is its meaning as Presence to being which 
is beyond being. Through the For-itself, a Beyond of being 
is revealed next to which the For-itself has to be what it is. 
As the saying goes, “I must become what I was”; but I must 
become what I was — in a world that has become and in a 
world that has become from the standpoint of what it is. This 
means that I give to the world its own possibilities in terms 
of the state which I apprehend on it. Determinism appears on 
the ground of the futurizing project of myself. Thus the future 
will be distinguished from the imaginary, where similarly I 
am what I am not, where similarly I find my meaning in a 
being which 1 have to be but where this For-itself which I 
have to be emerges on the ground of the nihilation of the 
world, apart from the world of being. 

But the Future is not solely the presence of the For-itself 
to a being situated beyond being. It is something which waits 
for the For-itself which I am. This something is myself. 
When I say that I will be happy, we understand that it is the 
present “I,” dragging its Past after it, who will be happy. Thus 
the Future is “I” inasmuch as I await myself as presence to a 
being beyond being. I project myself toward the Future in 
order to merge there with that which I lack; that is, with that 
which if synthetically added to my Present would make me be 
what I am. Thus what the For-itself has to be as presence to 
being beyond being is its own possibility. The Future is the 
ideal point where the sudden infinite compression of factic- 
ity (Past), of the For-itself (Present), and of its possible (a 
particular Future) will at last cause the Self to arise as the 


TEMPORALITY 


185 


existence in-itself of the For-itself. The project of the For- 
itself toward the future which it w is a project toward the 
In-itself. In this sense the For-itself has to be its future be- 
cause it can be the foundation of what it is only before itself 
and beyond being. It is the very nature of the For-itself that 
it must be “an always future hollow.” For this reason it will 
never have become, in the Present, what it had to be, in the 
Future. The entire future of the present For-itself falls into 
the Past as the future along with this For-itself itself. It will 
be the past future of a particular For-itself or a former future. 
This future is not realized. What is realized is a For-itself 
which is designated by the Future and which is constituted in 
connection with this future. For example, my final position on 
the tennis court has determined on the ground of the future all 
my intermediary positions, and finally it has been reunited 
with an ultimate position identical with what it was in the 
. future as the meaning of my movements- But, precisely, this 
“reuniting” is purely ideal; it is not really operative. The 
future does not allow itself to be rejoined; it slides into the 
Past as a bygone future, and the Present For-itself in all its 
facticity is revealed as the foundation of its own nothingness 
and once again as the lack of a new future. Hence comes that 
ontological disillusion which awaits the For-itself at each 
emergence into the future. “Under the Empire how beautiful 
was the Republic!” Even if my present is strictly identical in 
its content with the future toward which I projected myself 
beyond being, it is not this present toward which 1 
was projecting myself; for I was projecting myself toward the 
future qua future — that is, as the point of the reuniting of my 
being, as the place of the upsurge of the Self. 

Now we are better able to raise the question of the being 
of the Future since this Future which I have to be is simply 
my possibility of presence to being beyond being. In this sense 
the Future is strictly opposed to the Past. The Past is, to be 
. sure, the being which I am outside of myself, but it is the 
being which I am without the possibility of not being it. This 
is what we have defined as being its past behind itself. The 
being of the Future which I have to be, on the contrary, is 
such that I can only be it; for my freedom gnaws at its being 
from below. This means that the Future constitutes the mean- 
ing of my present For-itself, as the project of its possibility, 
but that it in no way predetermines my For-itself which is to- 
come, since the For-itself is always abandoned to the nihilat- 


186 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ing obligation of being the foundation of its nothingness. The 
Future can only effect a pre-outline of the limits within which 
the For-itself will make itself be as a flight making itself pres- 
ent to being in the direction of another future. The future is 
what I would be if I were not free and what I can have to 
be only because I am free. It appears on the horizon to an- 
nounce to me what I am from the standpoint of what I shall 
be. (“What are you doing? I am in the process of tacking up 
this tapestry, of hanging this picture on the wall.”) Yet at 
the same time by its nature as a future present-for-itself, it is 
disarmed; for the For-itself which will-be, will be in the mode 
of determining itself to be, and the Future, then become a 
past future as a pre-outline of this for-itself, will be able only 
as the past to influence it to be what it makes itself be. In 
a word, I am my Future in the constant perspective of the 
possibility of not being it. Hence that anguish which we 
have described above which springs from the fact that I am 
not sufficiently that Future which I have to be and which 
gives its meaning to my present: it is because I am a being 
whose meaning is always problematic. In vain would the For- 
itself long to be enchained to its Possibility, as to the being 
which it is outside itself but which it is surely outside itself. 
The For-itself can never be its Future except problematically, 
for it is separated from it by a Nothingness which it is. In 
short the For-itself is free, and its Freedom is to itself its 
own limit To be free is to be condemned to be free. Thus the 
Future qua Future does not have to be. It is not in itself, and 
neither is it in the mode of being of the For-itself since it is 
the meaning of the For-itself. The Future is not, it is possi- 
bilized. 

The Future is the continual possibilization of possibles — 
^ the meaning of the present For-itself in so far as this mean- 
ing is problematic and as such radically escapes the present 
For-itself. 

The Future thus defined does not correspond to a homo- 
geneous and chronologically ordered succession of moments to 
come.^ To be sure, there is a hierarchy of my possibles. But 
mis hierarchy does not correspond to the order of universal 
Temporality such as will be established on the bases of orig- 
inal Temporality. I am an infinity of possibilities, for the 
meaning of the For-itself is complex and can not be contained 
in one formula. But a particular possibility may be more deter- 
minant for the meaning of the present For-itself than another 



TEMPORALITY 


187 


which is nearer in universal time. For example, the possi- 
bility of going at two o’clock to see a friend whom I have not 
seen for two years — ^this is truly a possible which I am. But 
the nearer possibilities — ^the possibilities of going there in a 
taxi, by bus, by subway, on foot — all these at present remain 
undetermined. I am not any one of these possibilities. Also 
there are gaps in the series of my possibilities. In the order 
of knowledge the gaps will be filled by the constitution of an 
homogeneous time without lacuna; in the order of action they 
win be filled by the will — that is, by rational, thematizing 
choice in terras of my possibles, and of possibilities which are 
not and will never be my possibilities and which I will realize 
in the mode of total indifference in order to be reunited with 
a possible which I am. 

n. THE ONTOLOGY OF TEMPORALITY 

A. Static Temporality 

Our phenomenological description of the three temporal 
ekstases should enable us at present to approach temporality 
as a total structure organizing within it secondary ekstatic 
structures. But this new study must be made from two differ- 
ent points of view. 

Temporality is often considered as an indefinable. Every- 
body admits however that it is before all else a succession. 
And succession in turn can be defined as an order in which 
the ordering principle is the relation before-after. A multiplic- 
ity ordered in terms of before and after is a temporal mul- 
tiplicity. It is appropriate therefore to begin by considering 
the constitution and the requirements of the terms before and 
after. This is what we shall call the static temporal since these 
notions of before and after can be considered in a strictly 
ordinal arrangement independent of change proper. But time 
is not only a fixed order for a determined multiplicity; ob- 
serving temporality more closely we establish the fact of suc- 
cession; that is, the fact that a particular after becomes a 
before, that the Present becomes past and the future a former- 
future. This may well be the subject of our second investi- 
gation under the name of the dynamic temporal. It is of course 
in the dynamic temporal that we will have to look for the 
secret of the static constitution of time. But it is preferable 
to divide up the difficulties. Indeed in a sense we can say that 



188 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

the static temporal can be considered separately as a certain 
formal structure of temporality — ^what Kant calls the order of 
time — and that the dynamic corresponds to the material 
flow or — ^using Kantian terminology — ^to the course of time. 
It will be to our advantage therefore to consider separately 
first this order and then this course. 

The order “before-after” is defined first of all by irrevers- 
ibility. We call such a series successive when we can consider 
the terms only one at a time and only in one direction. But 
precisely because the terms of the series are revealed one at a 
time and because each is exclusive of the others, some people 
have wanted to see in the before and the after forms of separa- 
tion. Actually time does separate me, for example, from the 
realization of my desires. If I am obliged to wait for that 
realization, it is because it is located after other events. With- 
out the succession of the “after,” I would be immediately 
what I wish to be; there would no longer be any distance 
between the present me and the later me, not any separation 
between dream and action. Novelists and poets have insisted 
on time’s power to separate, and they have emphasized like- 
wise an accompanying idea, which however springs from the 
dynamic temporal — ^that every “now” is destined to become a 
“formerly.” Time gnaws and wears away; it separates; it flies. 
And by virtue of separation — ^by separating man from his 
pain or from the object of his pain — ^time cures. 

“Let time do it,” said the King to Don Roderigo, In gen- 
eral people have been struck with the necessity for all being 
to be divided up into an infinite dispersion of afters which 
succeed each other. Even the permanents, even this table, 
which remains invariable while I change, must spread out and 
refract its being in the temporal dispersion. Time separates 
me from myself, from what I have been, from what I wish to 
be, from what I wish to do, from things, and from others. It 
is time which is chosen as the practical measure of distance; 
this town is half an hour away, that one an hour; it will take 
three days to finish this work, etc. It results from these prem- 
ises that^ a temporal vision of the world and of man will 
dissolve into a crumbling of befores and afters. The unity of 
this crumbling, the temporal atom, will be the instant, which 
has its place before certain determined instants and after other 
instantswithout admitting either before or after inside its own 
orm. The instant is indivisible and non-temporal since tem- 
pera ity is succession, but the world dissolves into an infinite 



TEMPORALITY 


189 


dust of instants. And it is a problem for Descartes, for ex- 
ample, to learn how there can be a passage f’-rim one instant to 
another instant; for the instants are juxtaposed — ue., separated 
by nothing and yet without communication. Similarly Proust 
asks how his' Self can pass from one instant to another; how, 
for example, he discovers after a night’s sleep precisely the 
Self of the day before rather than some other one. More rad- 
ically, the empiricists after having denied the permanence of 
the Self try in vain to establish a semblance of transversal unity 
across the instants of psychic life. Thus when we consider in 
isolation the dissolving power of temporality, we are forced to 
admit that the act of having existed at a given instant does not 
constitute a right to exist at the following instant, not even a 
mortgage or- option on the future. The problem is then to 
explain how there is a world — Le., connected changes and 
permanences in time. 

Yet temporality is not solely nor even primarily separa- 
tion. We can account for this by considering more precisely 
the notion of before and after. A, let us say, is after B. Now 
we have established an express relation of order between A 
arid B which supposes therefore their unification at the heart 
of this very order. Even if there had been no other relation 
between A and B than this, it would still be sufficient to assure 
their connection, for it would allow thought to go from one to 
the other and to unite them in a judgment of succession. If, 
then, time is separation, it is at least a separation of a special 
type — a division which reunites. So far so good, somebody will 
say, but this unifying relation is pre-eminently an external re- 
lation. When the Association School wanted to establish that 
the mind’s impressions were held together only by purely ex- 
ternal bonds, did they not finally reduce all associative con- 
nections to the relation of tjefore-after, conceived as simple 
“contiguity”? 

Of course. But has not Kant shown that the unity of ex- 
perience and hence the unification of temporal change are 
required in order for the slightest bond of empirical associa- 
tion to be even conceivable? Let us consider the association 
theory more carefully. It is accompanied by a monistic concep- 
hon to the effect that being is everywhere being-in-itself. Each 
impression on the mind is in itself what it is; it is isolated in 
Its present plenitude and does not allow any trace of the 
future or any lack. Hume, when he issued his famous chal- 
enge, was concerned with establishing this law, which he 



190 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

claimed to derive from experience; one can at wm exai^e 
any impression, strong or weak; one will never 
in it but itself so that any connection with an^tecedent or a 
consequent, no matter how constant it may be, remams un- 

“"^St^^^suppose a temporal content A existing as a being 
in-itself and a temporal content B, posterior to the first and 
existing in the same mode— that is, in &e self-mclusion o 
identity. It should be remarked first that tins self-identity 
obliges them to exist each without any separation from itselt, 
without even a temporal separation, whether in etermty or m 
the instant — and eternity and the instant are here equivalent 
since the instant, not being defined internally in connec- 
tion with before-after, is non-temporal. One may ask how 
under these circumstances the state A can be prior to the state 
B. It would be of no use to reply that it is not which 
are prior or post but the instants which contain them, for on 
this theory the instants are in-itselfs, like the states. But the 
priority of A over B supposes in the very nature of A (instant 
or state) an incompleteness which points toward B. If A is 
prior to B, then A receives this determination in B. Othenvise 
neither the upsurge nor the annihilation of B isolated in its 
instant can confer on A isolated in its instant the slightest 
particular quality. In a word, if A is to be prior to B, it must 
be, in its very being, in B as A’s future. Conversely, B, if it 
is to be posterior to A, must linger behind itself in A, which 
will confer on B its sense of posteriority. If then we grant 
a priori being in-itself to A and to B, it is impossible to es- 
tablish between them the slightest connection of succession. 
That connection in fact would be a purely external relation 
and as such would necessarily hang in midair, deprived of 
any substratum, without power to get any hold on either A 
or B — in a sort of non-temporal nothingness. 

There remains the possibility that this relation before-after 
can exist only for a witness who establishes it. The difficulty is 
that if this witness can be simultaneously in A and in B, it is 
because he is himself temporal, and the problem will be raised 
anew for him. Or rather, on the contrary, he can transcend 
time by a gift of temporal ubiquity which is equivalent to non- 
temporality. This is the solution at which both Descartes and 
Kant stopped. For them temporal unity, at the heart of which 
is revealed the synthetic relation before-after, is conferred on 
the multiplicity of instants by a being who himself escapes 


TEMPORALITY 


191 


temporality. Both of them start from the presupposition of a 
time which would be a form of division and which itself 
dissolves in pure multiplicity. Since the unity of time can 
not be furnished by time itself, both philosophers put an 
extra-temporal being in charge of it: God and his continuous 
creation with Descartes, the “I think” {Ich denke) and its 
forms of synthetic unity with Kant. For Descartes, time is 
unified by its material content, which is maintained in exis- 
tence by a perpetual creation ex nihilo; for Kant, on the other 
hand, the concepts of pure understanding apply to the very 
form of time. In both cases it is a non-temporal (God or the 
“I think”) which is charged with providing the non-temporals 
(instants) with their temporality. Temporality becomes a 
simple external and abstract relation between non-temporal 
substances; there is an attempt to reconstruct it entirely with 
atemporal materials. 

It is evident that such-- a reconstruction, made first in 
opposition to time, can not later lead to the temporal. Either 
we will implicitly and surreptitiously temporalize the non-tem- 
poral; or else if we scrupulously preserve its non-temporality, 
time will become a pure human illusion, a dream. If time is 
real, then even God wiU have' to “wait for the sugar to dis- 
solve.” He must be both down there in the future and yes- 
terday in the past in order to effect the connection of mo- 
ments, for it is necessary that he take hold of them there 
where they are. Thus his pseudo non-temporality hides other 
concepts — that of temporal infinity and that of temporal ubiq- 
uity. But these can have meaning only'for a synthetic form of 
withdrawal from self which no longer corresponds to being 
in itself. If, on the contrary, we base, for example, the 
omniscience of God on his extra-temporality, then he does 
not have to wait till the sugar dissolves in order to see that it 
will dissolve. But then the necessity of waiting and conse- 
quently temporality can represent only an illusion resulting 
from human finitude; the chronological order is only the 
confused perception of an order which is logical and eternal. 
This argument can be applied without any modification to 
the Kantian “I think.” It would be of no use to object, as 
Kant does, that time has a unity as such since it arises as an 
a priori form from the non-temporal; for the problem is not 
so much to account for the total unity of its upsurge as for 
the intra-temporal connections of before and after. 

Someone may speak of a potential temporality which the 



192 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

unification causes to become actuality. But this potentid suc- 
cession is even less comprehensible than the real succession of 
which we spoke earlier. What is a succession which waits for 
unification in order to become a succession? To whom or what 
does it belong? Yet if it is not already given somewhere, how 
could the non-temporal secrete it without thereby losing all 
non-temporality; how could the succession even emanate 
from the non-temporal without shattering it? Moreover the 
very idea of unification is here altogether incomprehensible. 
We have in fact supposed two in-itselfs isolated each at its 
own place and date. How can we unify them? Are we dealing 
with a real unification? In this case either we are merely play- 
ing with words — and the unification will have no hold on the 
two in-itselfs isolated in their respective self-identity and 
completeness; or else it will be necessary to constitute a unity 
of a new type — namely, ekstatic unity in which each state 
will be outside itself, down there in order to be before or 
after the other. But this would necessitate shattering their 
being, expanding it, in a word temporalizing it, and would not 
merely bring them together. But how will the non-temporal 
unity of the “I think” as the simple faculty of thought be capa- 
ble of effecting this decompression of being? Shall we say 
that the unification is potential; that is, that beyond impres- 
sions we have projected a type of unity roughly comparable to 
Husserl’s noema? But how will a non-temporal which has to 
unite non-temporals conceive a unification of the type of the 
succession? And if as will then have to be admitted, the esse 
of time is a percipi, how is the percipitur constituted? In a 
word, how could a being with a temporal structure apprehend 
as temporals (or intend as such) in-itselfs isolated in their 
non-temporality? Thus inasmuch as temporality is at once a 
form of separation and a form of synthesis, it does not allow 
itself either to be derived from a non-temporal or to be im- 
posed from without upon non-temporals. 

Leibniz in reaction against Descartes, and Bergson in 
reaction against Kant have in turn tried to see in temporality 
only^ a pure relation of immanence and cohesion. Leibniz 
considers that the problem of the passage from one instant to 
another and its solution, continuous creation, are a false prob- 
lem and a useless solution. According to him Descartes forgot 
the continuity of time. By asserting the continuity of 
tune, we forbid ourselves to conceive of time in the form of 
instants, and if there is no longer an instant, there is no 



TEMPORALITY 


193 


longer any relation of before-after between instants. Time is a 
vast continuity of flow to which no original element existing 
in-itself may be assigned. 

Leibniz has forgotten that before-after is also a form 
which separates. If time is a given continuity with an undeni- 
able tendency to separate, one can raise Descartes’ question 
in another form: what is the origin of the cohesive power of 
continuity? Of course there are primary elements juxtaposed 
in a continuum. But this is precisely because there is at the 
start a unification. It is because I draw a straight line, as Kant 
says, that the straight line, realized in the unity of a single act, 
is something other than an infinite series of points. Who 
then draws time? In short this continuity is a fact which 
must be accounted for. It cannot be a solution. We may recall 
here the famous definition of Poincare; a series a, b, c is con- 
tinuous when we can write a=b, b=c, a-^c. This definition is 
excellent in that it gives us a foreshadowing of a type of being 
which is 'what it is not and which is not what it is: by virtue 
of the axiom, a—c; by virtue of continuity itself, a-hc. 
Thus a is and is not equivalent to c. And b, equal to a and 
equal to c, is different from itself inasmuch as a is not equal 
to c. But this ingenious definition rests on a mere playing with 
words such as we confronted in the view of the in-itself. And 
while it furnishes us vfith a type of being which at the same 
time is and is not, it does not furnish us with either its princi- 
ples or its foundation. Everything still remains to be done. In 
the study of temporality in particular, we realize well what 
service continuity can render us by putting in between the 
instant a and the instant c, no matter how close together they 
are, an intermediary b, such that, according to the formula 
a=b, bz=:c, a-^c, in this case b is at once indistinguishable 
from a and indistinguishable from c, which are perfectly dis- 
tinct one from the other. It is b which will realize the relation 
before-after, it is b which will be before itself inasmuch as it is 
indistinguishable from a and from c. All very good! But how 
can such a being exist? Whence comes its ekstatic nature? 
How does it happen that the division which is outlined in it is 
not achieved? "V^y does it not explode into two terms, one of 
which would dissolve into a and the other in c? How can we 
^il to see that there is here a problem concerning its unity? 

.®f^nps a deeper examination of the conditions of the possi- 
bilities of this being would have shown us that only the For- 
itself could thus exist in the ekstatic unity of self. But this 



194 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

examination has not been attempted, and temporal cohesion, 
with Leibniz, hides after all the cohesion through absolute 
immanence of logic— i.e., identity. But if the chronological 
order is continuous, it could not “symbolize” with the order 
of identity, for the continuous is not compatible with the 
identical. 

Similarly Bergson with his duration, which is a melodic 
organization and multiplicity of interpenetration, does not 
appear to see that an organization of multiplicity presupposes 
an organizing act. He is right in contrast to Descartes when he 
suppresses the instant; but Kant was right rather than Berg- 
son in claiming that there is no given synthesis. This Past of 
Bergson’s which clings to the present and even penetrates it 
is scarcely more than a rhetorical figure. It shows well the 
difficulties which Bergson encountered in his theory of mem- 
ory. For if the Past, as he maintains, is inactive, it can only re- 
main behind and will never come to penetrate the present in 
the form of memory unless a present being has undertaken to 
exist as well ekstatically in the Past. Of course, with Bergson, 
it is indeed one and the same being which endures. But that 
makes one realize aU the more the need for ontological elu- 
cidations. For we do not know finally if it is the being which 
endures or if it is duration which is being. And if duration is 
being, then Bergson must tell us what is the ontological struc- 
ture of duration; and if, on the contrary, it is being which 
endures, he must show us what it is in being which permits it 
to endure. 

What can we conclude as the result of this discussion? 
First of all this: temporality is a dissolving force but it is at 
the^ center of a unifying act; it is less a real multiplicity — 
which could not subsequently receive any unity and which 
consequently would not even exist as a multiplicity — ^than a 
quasi-multiplicity, a foreshadowing of dissociation in the heart 
of umty. We need not try to consider either one of these two 
aspects separately. If we first posit temporal unity,, we risk no 
longer being able to understand anything about irreversible 
succession as the meaning of this unity, and if we consider the 
dismtegrating succession as the original character of time, we 
nsk no longer being able to understand that there is one time. 
If ffien there is no priority of unity over multiplicity, nor of 
multiplicity over unity, it is necessary to conceive of temporal- 
ity as a unity which multiplies itself; that is, temporality can 
ne only a relation of being at the heart of this same being. 



TEMPORALITY 


195 


We can not picture it as a container whose being would be 
given, for this would be to renounce forever the hope of 
understanding how this being in itself can be broken up into 
multiplicity or how the in-itself of the containing minima or 
instants can be reunited within the unity of one time. Tem- 
porality is not. Only a being of a certain structure of being can 
be temporal in the unity of its being. The before and after are 
intelligible, as we have observed, only as an internal relation. 
It is there in the after that the before causes itself to be de- 
termined as before and conversely. In short the before is in- 
telligible only if it is the being which is before itself. This 
means that temporality can only indicate the mode of being 
of a being which is itself outside itself. Temporality must have 
the structure of selfness. Indeed it is only because the self in 
its being is there outside itself that it can be before or after 
itself, that there can be in general any before and after. Tem- 
porality exists only as the intra-structure of a being which has 
to be its own being; that is, as the intra-structure of a For-it- 
self. Not that the For-itself has an ontological priority over 
temporality. But Temporality is the being of the For-itself in 
so far as the For-itself has to be its being ekstatically. Tem- 
porality is not, but the For-itself temporalizes itself by existing. 

Conversely our phenomenological study of the Past, the 
Present, and the Future allows us to demonstrate that the For- 
itself can not be except in temporal form. 

Tlie For-itself rising into being as the nihilation of the 
In-itself constitutes itself simultaneously in all the possible 
dimensions of nihilation. From whatever point of view it is 
considered, it is the being which holds to itself by a single 
thread, or more precisely it is the being which by being 
causes all the possible dimensions of its nihilation to exist. 
In the ancient world the profound cohesion and dispersion 
of the Jewish people was designated by the term “Diaspora.” 
It is this word which will serve to designate the mode of 
being of the For-itself; it is diasporatic. Being-in-itself has 
only one dimension of being, but the appearance of nothing- 
ness as that which is made-to-be at the heart of being compli- 
cates the existential structure by causing the appearance of the 
ontological mirage of the Self. We shall see later that reflec- 
tion, transcendence, being-in-the-world, and being-for-others 
represent several dimensions of nihilation or, if you prefer, 
several original relations of being with the self. Thus nothing- 
ness introduces quasi-multiplicity into the heart of being. This 



196 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

quasi-multiplicity is tlic foundation of all inlra-mundanc 
multiplicities, for a multiplicity supposes an original unity at 
the heart of which the multiplicity is omlinccl. In this sense 
it is not true, as Meyerson claims, that the <iivc^^c creates a 
scandal and that the responsibility for ihk scandal rests with 
the real. The in-itsclf is not diversity; it is not multiplicity; 
and in order for it to receive multiplicity ns the chtsractcristic 
of itsbeing-in-thc-midsi-of-thC'World. a bcinn, must ruisc svhich 
is simultaneously present to each in-itsclf isolated in its own 
identity. It is through human rc.ality that multiplicity cotnes 
into the world; it is the quasi-multiplicity at the heart of 
bcing-for-itsclf which causes number to he revealed in the 
world. 

But what is the meaning of these multiple dimensions or 
quasi-mulliplcs of the For-itsclf? They arc various relations 
to its being. Wlien something simply is what it is, it has only 
one way of being its being. But the moment that something is 
no longer its being, then various ways of being it while not 
being it arise simultaneously. Tlic For-it.sclf — if we .stick to the 
primary ckstascs (those which both indicate the origin:',! mean- 
ing of the nihilaiion and represent the Ircsi nihilntinn) — can 
and must at the same lime fulfill these three require- 
ments: (I) to not-bc what it is, (2) to be what it is not, (3) 
to be what it is not and to not-bc what it is — within the unity 
of a perpetual referring. Here we arc dealing wiih i}\rce ckstai- 
ic dimensions; the meaning of the ckstasis is distance from 
self. It is impo.ssiblc to conceive of a consciousness v>hich 
would not c.xist in these three dimensions. And if Ujc copio 
discovers one of them first, that does not mean that this di- 
mension is first but only that it is most ctxsily disclosed. But 
by itself alone it is unsclbstartfit^ and it immediately allows the 
other dimensions to be seen. Tlic For-itself is a being w'hich 
must simultaneously exist in all its dimensions. Here distance, 
conceived as distance from the self, is nothing real, nothing 
which is in a general way as in-ilself; it is simply the nothing, 
the nothingness which “is made-to-be” as separation. Each 
dimension is the For-itscifs way of projecting itself vainly 
toward the Self, of being what it is beyond a nothingness, a 
different way of being this fall of being, this frustration of 
being which the For-itself has to be. Let us consider these 
dimensions one by one. 

In the first dimension the For-itself has to be its being, 
ehmd itself, as that which it is w’ithout being the foundation 



TEMPORALITY 


197 


/ 


of it. Its being is there, opposite it, but a nothingness separates 
it from its being, the nothingness of facticity. The For-itself 
as the foundation of its nothingness — and as such necessary 
— is separated from its original contingency in that it can 
neither get rid of it nor merge with it. It is for itself but in 
the mode of the irremediable and the gratuitous. Its being is 
for it, for it is not for this being, because such a reciprocity of 
reflection-reflecting would cause the original contingency of 
what is to disappear. Precisely because the For-itself appre- 
hends itself in the form of being, it is at a distance — ^like a 
game of reflection-reflecting which slips into the in-itself and 
m which it is no longer the reflection which makes the reflect- 
ing exist nor the reflecting which makes the reflection exist. 
This being, because of the very fact that the For-itself has to 
be it, gives itself as something which is irretrievable precisely 
because the For-itself can not found it in the mode reflection- 
reflecting but only as it founds the connection between this 
being and itself. The For-itself does not found the being of 
this being but only the fact that this being can be given. 

We are dealing here with an unconditional necessity: 
whatever the For-itself under consideration may be, it is in one 
certain sense; it is since it can be named, since certain charac- 
teristics may be affirmed or denied concerning it. But in so 
'far as it is For-itself, it is never what it is. What it is is 
behind it as the perpetual surpassed. It is precisely this sur- 
passed facticity which we call the Past. The Past then is a 
necessary structure of the For-itself; for the For-itself can 
exist only as a nihilating surpassing, and this surpassing im- 
plies something surpassed. Consequently it is impossible at 
any particular moment when we consider a For-itself, to appre- 
hend it as nbt-yet-having a Past. We need not believe that the 
For-itself exists &st and arises in the world in the absolute 
newness of a being without a past and that it then gradually 
constitutes a past for itself. But whatever may be the circum- 
stances under which the For-itself arises in the world, it comes 
to the world in the ekstatic unity of a relation with its Past; 
there is no absolute beginning which without ever having a 
past would become past. Since the For-itself qua For-itself 
has to be its past, it comes into_the world with a Past. 

^ These few remarks may permit us to view in a somewhat 
different light the problem of birth. Actually it seems shock- 
ing that consciousness “appears” at a certain moment, that it 
comes “to inhabit” the embryo, in short that there is a mo- 



198 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ment when the living being in formation is without conscious- 
ness and a moment when a consciousness without a past is 
suddenly imprisoned in it. But the shock will cease if it ap- 
pears that there can be no consciousness without a past. This 
does not mean, diowever, that every consciousness supposes a 
prior consciousness fixed in the In-itself. The relation of the 
present For-itself to the For-itself become In-itself hidesTrom 
us the primitive relation of Fastness, which is a relation be- 
tween the For-itself and the pure In-itself. In fact it is as the 
nihilation of the In-itself that the For-itself arises in the world, 
and it is by this absolute event that the Past as such is con- 
stituted as the original, nihilating relation between the For- 
itself and the In-itself. What originally constitutes the being of 
the For-itself is this relation to a being which is not conscious- 
ness, which exists in the total night of identity, and which the 
For-itself is nevertheless obliged to be, outside and behind it- 
self. The For-itself, which can in no case be reduced to this 
being, represents an absolute newness in relation to it, but the 
For-itself feels a profound solidarity of being with it and in- 
dicates this by the word before. The In-itself is what the For- 
itself was before. In this sense we can easily conceive that our 
past appears to us bounded by a fine, smooth wire, which 
would become actual if consciousness could spring up in the 
world before having a past, but which, on the contrary, is lost 
in a progressive obscuration back to that darkness which is 
nevertheless still ourselves. We can conceive of the ontological 
meaning of this shocking solidarity with the foetus, a solidar- 
ity which we neither deny nor understand. For finally this 
foetus was me; it represents the factual limit for my mem- 
ory but not the theoretical limit of my past. 

There is a metaphysical problem concerning birth in that 
I can be anxious to know how I happen to have been bom 
from that particular embryo; and this problem is perhaps in- 
soluble. But it is not an ontological problem; we do not have 
to^ ask why there can be a birth of consciousness, for con- 
sciousness can appear to itself only as a nihilation of in-itself 
— f.e., as being already born. Birth as an ekstatic relation of 
eing to the In-itself which it is not and as the a priori con- 
stitution of pastness is a law of being for the For-itself. To 
e For-itself is to he born. But one should not next raise 
met^hysical questions concerning the In-itself from which 

T bom, questions such as: “How was there an 

in-itself before the birth of the For-itself? How was the For-' 



TEMPORALITY 


199 


itself born from this In-itself rather than from another?” Etc. 
All these questions fail to take into account the fact that it is 
through the For-itself that the Past in general can exist. If 
there is a Before, it is because the For-itself has risen in the 
world, and it is from the standpoint of the For-itself that the 
past can be established. To the extent that the In-itself is made 
co-present with the For-itself, a world appears instead of iso- 
lated examples of In-itself. And in this world it is possible to 
effect a designation and to say this object, that object. In this 
sense, inasmuch as the For-itself in its coming into being 
causes a world of co-presences to exist, it causes also the 
appearance of its “before” as a co-present to the in-itselfs in a 
world or, if you prefer, in a state of the world which has 
passed. 

Thus in a sense the For-itself appears as being bom from 
the world, for the In-itself from which it is born is in the 
midst of the world, as a co-present past among co-present 
pasts; into the world and in terms of the world a For-itself 
arises which did not exist before and which has been bom. 
Blit in another sense it is the For-itself which causes the exis- 
tence of a before in general and the existence in this before 
of co-presents united in the unity of one past world and such 
that one can designate one or the other among them as this 
object. There is not first _ one universal time where a For-itself 
suddenly appears not yet having a Past. Rather it is in terms of 
birth as the original and a priori law of being for the For- 
itself that there is revealed a world with a universal time in 
which we can designate a moment when the For-itself was 
not yet arid a moment when it appeared, beings from which 
the For-itself was not born and a being from which it was 
born. Birth is the upsurge of the absolute relation of Pastness 
as the ekstatic being of the For-itself in the In-itself. Through 
birth a Past appears in the world. We shall return to this. Here 
It is sufficient to note that consciousness or for-itself is a being 
which rises to being beyond an unalterable which it is and that 
this unalterable, inasmuch as it is behind the For-itself in the 
midst of the world, is the Past. 

The Past as the unalterable being which I have to be 
without any possibility of not being it does_ not enter into the 
unity “reflection-reflecting” of the Erlebnis; it is outside. Yet 
neither does it exist as that of which there is consciousness in 
the sense, for example, that the perceived chair is that of 
which there is perceptive consciousness. In the case of the per- 



200 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ception of the chair, there is a thesis— that is, the apprehen- 
sion and afiarmation of the chair as the in-itself which con- 
sciousness is not. What consciousness has to be in the mode of 
being of the For-itself is not-being-the-chair. For its “not- 
being-the-chair” is, as we shall see, in the form of the con- 
sciousness (of) not-beihg (i.e., the appearance of not-being) 
for a witness who is there only to bear witness to this not- 
being. The negation then is explicit and constitutes the bond 
of being between the perceived object and the for-itself. The 
For-itself is nothing more than this translucent Nothing 
which is the negation of the thing perceived. But although 
the Past is outside, the connection here is not of the same type, 
for the For-itself gives itself as being the Past Due to this fact 
there can not be a thesis of the Past, for one can posit only 
what one is not. Thus in the perception of the object the 
For-itself acknowledges itself to itself as not being the ob- 
ject, while in the unveiling of the Past the For-itself acknowl- 
edges itself as being the Past and is separated from it only by 
its nature as For-itself, which can be nothing. Thus the Past 
is not made a thesis, and yet the Past is not immanent in the 
For-itself. It haunts the For-itself at the very moment that 
the For-itself acknowledges itself as not being this or that 
particular thing. The Past is not the object of the regard of 
the For-itself. This translucent regard is directed to itself be- 
yond the thing, toward the future. The Past as a thing which 
one is without positing it, as that which haunte with- 
out being observed, is behind the For-itself, outside the the- 
matic field which is before the For-itself as that which it 
illuminates. The Past is “posited opposite” the For-itself and 
assumed as that which the For-itself has to be without being 
able either to affirm or deny .or thematize or absorb it 
To be sure, the Past can be the object of a thesis for me, 
and indeed it is often thematized. But then it is the object of 
an explicit investigation, and in this case the For-itself affirms 
itself as not being this Past which it posits. The Past is no 
longer behind; it does not cease being past, but I myself 
cease to be the Past. In the primary mode I was my Past with- 
out knowing it (but by no means not vrithout being conscious 
of it) , in the secondary mode I know my past but I no lonser 
was it. Someone may ask how I can be conscious of my Past 
if it is not in the thetic mode. Yet the Past is there constantly. 
It is the very meaning of the object which I look at and which 
I have already seen, of the familiar faces which surround me. 


TEMPORALITY 


201 


It is the origin of this movement which presently follows and 
which I would not be able to call circular if I were not myself 
— ^in the Past — the witness of its beginning. It is the origin 
and springboard of all my actions; it is that constantly given 
density of the world which allows me to orient myself and to 
get my bearings. It is rhyself in so far as I aim at myself as a 
person (there is also a structure to-come of the Ego). In 
short, the Past is my contingent and gratuitous bond with 
the world and with myself inasmuch as I constantly live it 
as a total renunciation. The psychologists call it empirical 
knowledge (savoir). But in addition to the fact that by this 
term they “psychologize” it, they thus remove any method of 
accounting for it. For empirical knowledge is ever3rwhere and 
conditions everything, even memory; in a word, intellectual 
memory presupposes knowledge. And what is their empirical 
knowledge — ^if we are to understand by it a present fact — 
if it is not an intellectual memory? This supple, insinuating, 
changing knowledge which makes the woof of all our thoughts 
and which is composed of a thousand empty indications, a 
thousand designations which point behind us, without image, 
without words, without thesis — ^this is my concrete Past inas- 
much as I was it as the unalterable background-depth of all 
my thoughts and all my feelings. 

In its second dimension of nihilation, the For-itself appre- 
hends itself as a certain lack. It is this lack and it is also the 
lacking, for it has to be what it is. To drink or to be drinking 
means never to have finished drinking, to have still to be 
drinking beyond the drinking which I am. And when “I 
have finished drinking,” / have drunk; the ensemble slips into 
the past. While actually drinking, I am then ibis drinking 
which I have to be and which I am not; every designation of 
myself if it is to be heavy and full, if it is to have the density 
of the self-identical — every such designation escapes me into 
fee past. If it reaches me in the Present, it is because it divides 
itself into the Not-yet; it is because it designates me as an un- 
achieved totality which can not be achieved. This Not-yet is 
gnawed by the nihilating freedom of the For-itself. It is not 
only being-at-a-distance; it is the whittling down of being. Here 
the For-itself, which was in advance of itself in the first 
dimension of nihilation, is now behind itself. Before itself, 
behind itself; never itself. This is the very meaning of the 
^o ekstases Past and Future, and this is why value in itself is 
by nature self-repose, non-temporality! The eternity which 



202 ' BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

man is seeking is not the infinity of duration, of that vain pur- 
suit after the self for which I am myself responsible; man 
seeks a repose in self, the atemporality of the absolute coinci- 
dence with himself. 

Finally, in the third dimension, the For-itself, dispersed 
in the perpetual game of reflected-reflecting,^ escapes itself 
in the unity of one and the same flight. Here being is every- 
where and nowhere: wherever one tries to seize it, it is there 
before one, it has escaped. It is this game of musical chairs at 
the heart of the For-itself which is Presence to being.® 

As Present, Past, Future — all at the same time — ^the For- 
itself dispersing its being in three dimensions is temporal due 
to the very fact that it nihilates itself. No one of these dimen- 
sions has any ontological priority over the other; none of them 
can exist without the other two. Yet in spite of all this, it is 
best to put the accent on the present ekstasis and not on the 
future ekstasis as Heidegger does: for it is as a revelation to 
itself that the For-itself is its Past, as that which it has-to-be- 
for-itself in a nihilating surpassing; and it is as a revelation to 
itself that it is a lack and that it is haunted by its future — 
that is, by that which it is for itself down there at a distance. 
The Present is not ontologically “prior” to the Past and to the 
Future; it is conditioned by them as much as it conditions 
them, but it is the mould of indispensable non-being for the 
total synthetic forms of Temporality. 

Thus Temporality is not a universal time containing all 
beings and in particular human realities. Neither is it a law of 
development which is imposed on being from without. Nor 
is it being. But it is the intra-structure of the being which is 
its own nihilation— that is, the mode of being peculiar to 
being-for-itself. The For-itself is the being which has to be its 
being in the diasporatic form of Temporality. 

B. Tete Dynamic of Temporality 

The fact that the upsurge of the For-itself is necessarily effect- 
ed according to the three dimensions of Temporality teaches us 

Possibly an error for the “reflection-reflecting,” which Sartre has used 
elsewhere. 

®Tr. I find it impossible to transfer the exact meaning from French to 
English. Chassi-croisi, literally a dancing expression, is equivalent to “set 
to partners.” From it derives the meaning of a futile rearrangement of 
personneL 



TEMPORALITY 


203 


nothing concerning the problem of duration, which falls un- 
der the heading of the dynamic of time. At first approach the 
problem appears twofold. Why does the For-itself undergo 
that modification of its being which makes it become Past? 
And why. does a new For-itself arise ex nihilo to become the 
Present of this Past? 

This problem has for a long time been disguised by a 
conception of the human being as an in-itselE. It is the 
sinew of Kant’s refutation of Berkeley’s idealism and a favorite 
argument of Leibniz that change by itself implies permanence. 
Consequently if we suppose a certain non-temporal perma- 
nence which remains across time, temporality is reduced to 
being no more than the measure and order of change. With- 
out change there is no temporality since time could not get 
any hold on the permanent and the identical. Moreover if as 
with Leibniz change itself is given as the logical explanation 
of a relation of conclusions to premises — ^that is, as the de- 
velopment of the attributes of a permanent subject — ^then there 
is no longer any real temporality. 

But this conception is based on several errors. First of all, 
the subsistence of a permanent element apart from something 
which changes can not allow change to be constituted as such 
except in the eyes of a witness who would be himself united 
with that which changes and with that which remains. In a 
word the unity of change and the permanent is necessary for 
the constitution of change as such. But this same term unity, 
which Leibniz and Kant have misused, does not signify very 
much here. What is meant by this unity of disparate ele- 
ments? Is it only a purely external attachment? Then it has no 
meaning. It must be a unity of being. But such a unity of 
being amounts to requiring that the permanent be that which 
changes; and hence the unity is at the start ekstatic and refers 
to the For-itself inasmuch as the For-itself is essentially ekstat- 
ic being; in addition the unity prevents permanence and 
change from existing each as in-itself. What is not said is 
that permanence and change are taken here as phenomena and 
have only a relative being; the In-itself is not opposed 
to phenomena as the noumenon is. A phenomenon is in-itself, 
according to the very terms of our definition, when it is what 
It is, even if it is in relation with a subject or another phe- 
immenon. Moreover the appearance of relation as determining 
the phenomena in connection with each other supposes an- 
tecedently the upsurge of an ekstatic being which can be what 



204 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

it is not in order to establish the “elsewhere” and relation in 
general. 

Moreover resorting to permanence in order to furnish 
the foundation for change is completely useless. What Kant 
and Leibniz want to show is that an absolute change is no 
longer strictly speaking change since it is no longer based on 
anything which changes — or in relation to which there is 
change. But in fact if what changes is its former state in the 
past mode, this is sufficient to make permanence superfluous. 
In this case change can be absolute; we can be dealing with a 
metamorphosis which touches all of being; it will be consti- 
tuted as change in relation to a prior state just as it will be 
in the Past in the mode of was. Since this link with the past 
replaces the pseudo-necessity of permanence, the problem of 
duration can and ought to be posited in relation to absolute 
changes. Moreover there is no other kind even “in the 
world.” Up to a certain threshold changes are non-existent; 
past this threshold, they extend to the total form — as the 
experiments of the Gestalt school have shown. 

In addition when we are dealing with human reality, what 
is necessary is pure and absolute change, which can very well 
be in addition a change with nothing which changes and 
which is actual duration. Even if we admitted, for example, 
that the simple consciousnesss of a For-itself was the abso- 
lutely empty presence of this For-itself to a permanent In- 
itself, stUl the very existence of the consciousness would imply 
ternporality since it would have to be without change what it 
is in the^form of “having been it.” There would be then not 
eternity but the constant necessity for the present For-itself to 
become the Past of a new Present and that by virtue of the 
very being of consciousness. And if someone should tell us 
that this perpetual recovery of the Present in the Past by a new 
Present implies an inner change in the For-itself, we should 
reply that then it is the temporality of the For-itself which is 
the foundation of the change and not the change which 
furnishes the foundation for temporality. Nothing can hide 
me foUowing problems which at first seem insoluble: Why 

oes the Present become the Past? What is this new Present 
w ich then springs forth? Where does it come from, and why 
does It arise? We must note that as is shown by our hypothesis 
ot an ‘empty” consciousness, the question here is not the 
necessity or a permanence to cascade from instant to instant 
wtule remammg materially a permanence. The real question 



TEMPORALITY 


205 


is the necessity for being, whatever it may be, to metamor- 
phose itself completely at once — ^form and content, to sink 
into the past and to thrust itself forward at the same time 
ex nihilo toward the future. 

But are these really two problems? Let us look more 
closely. The Present could not pass except by becoming the 
before of a For-itself which constitutes itself as the after of 
that Present. There is then only one phenomenon: the up- 
surge of a new Present which is making-past the Present 
which it was, and the Making-Past of a Present involving the 
appearance of a For-itself for which this Present is going to 
become Past The phenomenon of temporal becoming is a 
global modification since a Past which would be the Past 
of nothing would no longer be a Past and since a Present 
must be necessarily the Present of this Past. This metamor- 
phosis, moreover, affects not only the pure Present; the for- 
mer Past and Future are equally affected. The Past of the 
Present which has undergone the modification of Pastness, 
becomes the Past of a Past— or a Pluperfect. So far as the 
Pluperfect is concerned, the heterogeneity of the Present 
and the Past is now suddenly suppressed since what made 
the Present distinct as such from the Past has now become 
Past. In the course of the metamorphosis the Present remaios 
the Present of this Past, but it becomes the past Present of 
this Past. That means first that this present is homogeneous 
with the series of the Past which extends from it all the way 
back to its birth, second that this present is no longer its Past 
in the form of having to be it but in the mode of having had 
to be it. The connection between Past and Pluperfect is a con- 
nection which is in the mode of the In-itself, and it appears 
on the foundation of the present For-itself. It is this which 
holds the series of the Past and pluperfects welded into a 
single block. 

The Future, on the other hand, although equally affected 
by the metamorphosis, does not cease to be future — ^that is, to 
remain outside the For-itself, in advance, beyond being — ^but 
It becomes the future of a past or a former future. It can enter 
into two kinds of relations with the new Present according to 
whether we are dealing with the immediate Future or the far 
Future. In the first case the Present is given as being this 
ruture m relation to the Past: “What I was waiting for — 
here it is.” It is the Present of its Past in the mode of the 
ormer Future of this Past. But at the same time that it is 



206 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

For-itself as the Future of this Fast, it realizes itself as For- 
itself, therefore as not being what the Future promised to be. 
There is a split: the Present becomes the Former Future of the 
Past while denying that it is this Future. And the original 
Future is not realized; it is no longer future in relation to 
the Present, but it does not cease to be future in relation to the 
Past. It becomes the unrealizable co-present of the Present and 
perserves a total ideality. “Is this what I was waiting for?” It 
remains a future ideally co-present with the Present, as the un- 
realized Future of the Past of this Present. 

When the Future is far removed, it remains future in 
relation to the new Present; but if the Present does not con- 
stitute itself as the lack of this Future, then this Future loses 
its character as possibility. In this case the former Future be- 
comes an indifferent possible in relation to the new Present 
and not its Possible. In this sense it no longer possibilizes it- 
self but qua possible it receives being-in-itself. It becomes a 
given Possible; that is, a Possible which is in-itself for a For- 
itself become In-itself. Yesterday it was possible — as my Possi- 
ble — ^that I should leave next Monday for the country. To- 
day this Possible is no longer my Possible; it remains the 
thematized object of my contemplation and has become the 
always future Possible which I have been. But its only 
bond with my Present is that I have to be in the mode of 
“was” this Present become Past for which this possible has not 
ceased being a possible — ^beyond my Present. But Future and 
past Present are solidified in the In-itself on the foundation 
of my Present. Thus the Future, in the course of the temporal 
process, passes to the in-itself without ever losing its character 
as Future. In so far as it is not achieved by the Present, it 
becomes simply a given Future. When it is achieved, it is 
affected with the quality of ideality; but this ideality is ideality 
in-itself, for it presents itself as a given lack of a given past and 
not as the lacking which a present For-itself has to be in the 
mode of not being. When the Future is surpassed, it remains 
forever on the margin of the series of Pasts as a former Future 
- a -former Future of a particular Past become Pluperfect, an 
ideal given Future as co-present to a Present become Past. 

We have yet to examine the metamorphosis of the pres- 
ent For-itself into the Past with the accompanying upsurge 
of a new Present. It would be an error to believe that the 
former Present is abolished and that there arises a Present in- 
itself which retains an image of the vanished Present. In one 


TEMPORALITY 


207 


sense it would almost be correct to reverse our terms in order 
to find the truth, for the making-past of the ex-present is a 
passage to the in-itself while the appearance of a new present 
is the nihilation of that in-itself. The Present is not a new In- 
itself; it is what it is not, that which is beyond being; it is that 
of which we can say “it is” only in the Past. The Past is not 
abolished; it is that which has become what it was; it is the 
Being of the Present. Finally, as we have sufficiently demon- 
strated, the relation of the Present to the Past is a relation of 
being, not of representation. 

Consequently the first characteristic which strikes us is the 
reapprehension of the For-itself by Being, as if the For-itself 
no longer had the strength to sustain its own nothingness. That 
deep fissure which the For-itself has to be is filled up; the 
Nothingness which must “be made-to-be” ceases to be, is ex- 
pelled with the result that Being-For-itself, made past, becomes 
a quality of the In-itself. . If I have experienced a particular 
sadness in the past, it exists no longer in so far as I have made 
myself experience it. This sadness no longer has the exact 
measure of being which can be enjoyed by an appearance 
which makes itself its own witness. It is because it has been; 
being comes to it, so to speak, as an external necessity. The 
Past is a fatality in reverse. The For-itself can make itself what 
it wishes, but it can not escape from tlie necessity of being ir- 
remediably — ^for a new For-itself — ^what it has wished to be. 
Hence the Past is a For-itself which has ceased to be a tran- 
scending presence to the In-itself. Now become an in-itself, it 
has fallen into the midst of the world. What I have to be I 
am as a presence to the world which I am not but which I 
"Was; I Was it in the midst of the world, just as things are, 
by virtue of existing within-the-world. Nevertheless this 
world in which the For-itself has to be what it was can not be 
the same as that to which it is actually present. Thus is con- 
stituted the Past of the For-itself as the past presence to a past 
state of the world. Even if the world has undergone no vari- 
ation while the For-itself “passed” from the Present to the Past, 
it is at least apprehended as having undergone the same for- 
mal change which we described earlier as taking place at the 
heart of being-for-itseif. This is a change which is only a 
reflection of the true internal change of consciousness. In 
other words, the For-itself falling into the Past as an ex- 
presence-to-being becomes in-itself, becomes a being “in-the- 
midst-of-the-world,” and the world is retained in the past 



208 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

dimension as that in the midst of which the past For-itself is 
in itself. Like the mermaid whose human body is completed in 
the tail of a fish, the extra-mxmdane For-itself is completed 
behind itself as a thing in the world. I am angry, melancholy, 
I have an Oedipus complex or an inferiority complex for 
always, but in the past in the form of the “was” in the midst 
of the world — ^just as I am a civil servant or a man with one 
arm or a proletarian. In the past the world surrounds me, and 
I lose myself in the universal determinism; but I radically 
transcend my past toward the future to the same extent that 
I “was it.” 

A For-itself which has squeezed out all its nothingness and 
been reapprehended by the In-itself, a For-itself dissolving in- 
to the world — such is the Past which I have to be, such is the 
avatar of the For-itself. But this avatar is produced in unity 
with the appearance of a For-itself which nihilates itself as 
Presence to the world and which has to be the Past which it 
transcends. What is the meaning of this upsurge? We must 
guard against seeing here the appearance of a new being. 
Everything happens as if the Present were a perpetual hole in 
being — ^immediately filled up and perpetually reborn — as if the 
Present were a perpetual flight away from the snare of the 
“in-itself’ which threatens it until that final victory of the in- 
itself which will drag it into a past \vhich is no longer the past 
of any For-itself. It is death which is this victory, for death is 
the foal arrest of Temporality by the making-past of the 
whole system or, if you prefer, by the recapture of human 
Totality by the In-itself. 

How can we explain this dynamic character of temporal- 
ity? If it is not — as we hope we have demonstrated — a con- 
tingent quality which is added to the being of the for-itself, 
we must be able to show that its dynamic is an essential 
structure of the For-itself conceived as the being which has to 
be its own nothingness. We find ourselves once more, it seems, 
at our point of departure. 

But the truth is that there is no problem. If we believe that 
we have met one, this is because in spite of our efforts to think 
of the for-itself as really for-itself, we have not been able to 
prevent ourselves from fixing it in the in-itself. If we start 
from the in-itself, the appearance of change can indeed con- 
stitute a problem: if the in-itself is what it is, how can it 
no longer be so? But if, on the contrary, we proceed from an 
adequate comprehension of the for-itself, it is no longer 



TEMPORALITY 


209 


change which needs explaining but rather permanence — ^if 
permanence can exist. In fact if we consider our description 
of the order of time apart from everything which could come 
from the course of time, it is clear that a temporality reduced 
to its order' would immediately become temporality in-itself. 
The ekstatic character of temporal being would not change 
anything here since this character is found in the past, not 
as constitutive of the for-itself but as a quality supported by 
the in-itself. If we imagine a Future such that it is purely 
and simply the Future of a for-itself, which is the for-itself of 
a certain past, and if we consider that change is a new prob- 
lem in relation to the description of temporality as such, then 
we confer _on the Future, conceived as this Future, an in- 
stantaneous immobility; we make of the for-itself a fixed 
quality which can be designated; and finally the ensemble 
becomes a made totality, the future and the past restrict the 
for-itself and constitute given limits for it. The ensemble, as 
temporality which is, is petrified around a solid nucleus, 
which is the present instant of the for-itself, and the problem 
is then indeed to explain how from this instant can arise an- 
other instant with its own cortege of past and future. We have 
escaped instantaneity in the sense that the instant would be 
the only in-itself reality limited by a nothingness of the future 
and a nothingness of the past, but we have fallen back into it 
by implicitly admitting a succession of temporal totalities of 
which each one would be centered around an instant. In a 
word, we have endowed the instant with ekstatic dimensions, 
but we have not thereby suppressed it, which means that we 
cause temporal totality to be supported by the non-temporal. 
Time, if it is, becomes again merely a.dream. 

But change belongs naturally to the for-itself inasmuch as 
this for-itself is spontaneity. A spontaneity of which we can 
say: it w. Or simply: This spontaneity should be allowed 
to define itself; this means both that it is the foundation not 
only of its nothingness of being but also of its being and that 
simultaneously being recaptures it to fix it in the given. A 
spontaneity which posits itself qua spontaneity is obliged by 
the same stroke to refuse what it posits; otherwise its being 
would become an acquisition and it would be perpetuated in 
being as the result of being acquired. Yet this refusal it- 
self is an acquisition which it must refuse lest it be ensnared 
in an inert prolongation of its existence. Someone may say 
that these ideas of prolongation and of acquisition already 



210 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


suppose temporality, and that is true. But this is because 
spontaneity itself constitutes the acquisition by the refusal 
and the refusal by the acquisition, for spontaneity can riot be 
without temporalizing itself. Its peculiar nature is not to profit 
from the acquisition which it constitutes by realizing itself 
as spontaneity. It is impossible otherwise to conceive of spon- 
taneity without contracting it within an instant and thereby 
fixing it in in-self; that is, without supposing a transcendent 
time. It would be in vain to object that we cannot think of 
anything except in temporal form and that our account begs 
the question since we temporalize being in order to make time 
spring from it a little afterwards. It would be useless to remind 
us of the passages in the Critique where Kant shows that a 
non-temporal spontaneity is inconceivable but not contradic- 
tory. It seems to us, on the contrary, that a spontaneity which 
would not escape from itself and which would not escape 
from that very escape, of which we could say, “It is this,” 
and which would allow itself to be enclosed in an unchange- 
able denomination — it seems that such a spontaneity would 
be precisely a contradiction and that it would ultimately be 
the equivalent of a particular aflarmative essence, the eternal 
subject which is never a predicate. Moreover it is precisely its 
character as spontaneity which constitutes the very irrevers- 
ibility of its evasions since from the moment of its appearance 
it is in order to refuse itself and since the order “positing- 
refusing” can not be reversed. The very positing is achieved 
in a refusing without ever attaining to an affirmative pleni- 
tude; otherwise it would be exhausted in an instantaneous in- 
itself, and it is only because it is refused that it passes to 
being in the totality of its accomplishment. The unitary series 
of “acquisitions-refused” has in addition an ontological priority 
over change, for change is simply the relation of the material 
contents of the senes. But we have shown that the very irre- 
versibility of temporalization® is necessary to the completely 
empty and a priori form of a spontaneity. 

I have presented this thesis by using the concept of spon- 
taneity which seemed to me more familiar to my readers. But 
we can now take up these ideas again in the perspective of 

terminology. A for-itself 
w ich did not endure would remain of course a negation of 

e transcendent in-itself and a nihilation of its own being in 
the form of the “reflection-reflecting.” But this nihilation 

«Tr. Correction for temporizatlok. an obvious misprint. 



TEMPORALITY 


211 


would become a given; that is, it would acquire the contin- 
gency of the in-itself, and the For-itself would cease to be the 
foundation of its own nothingness; it would no longer be as 
having to be, but in the nihilating unity of the dyad reflection- 
reflecting, it would be. The flight of the for-itself is the refusal 
of contingency by the very act which constitutes the for-itself 
as being the foundation of its nothingness. But this flight es- 
tablishes in contingency exactly what is fled: the for-itself 
which has been fled is left at its place. It can not be anni- 
hilated since I am it, but neither can it any longer be as the 
foundation of its own nothingness since it can be this only in 
flight. It is finished. \^fliat applies to the for-itself as presence 

tcH is also naturally appropriate as well to the totality 

of temporalization. This totality never is achieved; it is a 
totality which is refused and which flees from itself. It is 
the wrenching away from self within the unity of a single 
upsurge, an inapprehensible totality which at the moment 
when it gives itself is ready beyond this gift of self. 

Thus the time of consciousness is human reality which 
temporalizes itself as the totality which is to itself its own in- 
completion; it is nothingness slipping into a totality as a de- 
totalizing ferment. This totality which runs after itself and 
refuses itself at the same time, which can find in itself no 
limit to its surpassing because it is its own surpassing and 
because it surpasses itself toward itself, can under no cir- 
cumstance exist within the limits of an instant. There is 
never an instant at which we can assert that the for-itself is, 
precisely because the for-itself never is. Temporality, on the 
contrary, temporalizes itself entirely as the refusal of the in- 
stant. 


m. ORIGINAL TEMPORALITY AND 
PSYCHIC TEMPORALITY: REFLECTION 

The for-itself endures in the form of a non-thetic conscious- 
ness (of) enduring. But I can “feel the time which flows” and 
apprehend myself as a unity of succession. In this case I am 
conscious of enduring. This consciousness is thetic and 
strongly resembles a knowledge just as duration which is tem- 
poralized under my regard is roughly like an object of knowl- 
edge. What relation can exist between original temporality 
and this psychic temporality which I encounter as soon as I 



212 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


apprehend myself “in process of enduring”? This problem 
brings us immediately to another problem, for the conscious- 
ness of duration is a consciousness of a consciousness which 
endures; consequently to posit the question of the nature and 
laws of this thetic consciousness of duration amounts to posit- 
ing that of the nature and the laws of reflection. In fact tem- 
porality in the form of psychic duration belongs to reflection, 
and all the processes of psychic duration belong to the con- 
sciousness reflected-on. 

Before asking how a psychic duration can be constituted 
as the immanent object of reflection, we must try to answer 
this preliminary question: how is reflection possible for a 
being which can be only in the past? Reflection is given by 
Descartes and by Husserl as a type of privileged intuition be- 
cause it apprehends consciousness in an act of present and 
instantaneous immanence. Will it keep its certitude if the 
being which it has to know is past in relation to it? And since 
all our ontology has its foundation in a reflective experience, 
does it not risk losing all its laws? Yet is it actually the past 
being which should make the object of reflective conscious- 
ness? If the process of reflection itself is a for-itself, ought it 
to be limited to an existence and certitude which are in- 
stantaneous? We can decide these questions only if we return 
« reflective phenomenon and determine its structure. 

^ Reflection is the for-itself conscious of itself. As the for- 
itself is already a non-thetic self-consciousness, we are accus- 
tomed to represent reflection as a new consciousness, abruptly 
appearing, directed on the consciousness reflected-on, and 

living m symbiosis with it. One recalls here the old idea ideae 
of Spinoza. 


But aside from the fact that it is difiicult to explain the 
upurge ex nihilo of the reflective consciousness, it is com- 
pletely impossible in this way to account for its absolute unity 
Jirc consciousness reflected-on, a unity which alone ren- 
® certainty of the reflective 

whiVfl^c' cannot here indeed say that the esse of that 
doe!\ t ^ percipi since its being is such that it 

perceived in order to exist. And its 
ofT reflection can not be the unitary relation 

tent ifto ^ thinking subject. If the known exis- 

then in ^ ^.^nie rank of being as the knowing existent, 

must descrihn Perspective of naive realism that we 

describe the relation of these two existents. But in this 



TEMPORALITY 


213 


case we are going to encounter the major difficulty of real- 
ism: how can two completely isolated independents, provided 
with that sufficiency of being which the Germans call Selb- 
stdndigkeit, enter into relation with each other, and in particu- 
lar how can they enter into that type of internal relation 
which we call knowledge? If iirst we conceive of reflection 
as an autonomous consciousness, we shall never be able to 
reunite it later with the consciousness reflected-on. They will 
always be two, and if — ^to suppose the impossible — ^the reflec- 
tive consciousness could be consciousness of the consciousness 
reflected-on, there could be only an external connection be- 
tween the two consciousnesses; at most we could imagine that 
reflection isolated in itself possesses an image of the conscious- 
ness reflected-on, and we would then fall back into idealism. 
Reflective knowledge, and in particular the cogito would lose 
their certainty and would obtain in exchange only a certain 
probability, scarcely definable. It is agreed then that reflection 
must be united to that which is reflected-on by a bond of 
being, that the reflective consciousness must be the conscious- 
ness reflected-on. 

But on the other hand, there can be no question here of a 
total identification of the reflective with that reflected-on, for 
this would suddenly suppress the phenomenon of reflection by 
allowing only the phantom dyad “the reflection-reflecting”^ 
to subsist. Here once again we meet that type of being which 
defines the for-itself: reflection — ^if it is to be apodictic evi- 
dence — demands that the reflective be that which is reflected- 
on. But to the extent that reflection is knowledge, the re- 
flected-on must necessarily be the object for the reflective; and 
this implies a separation of being. Thus it is necessary that the 

^Tr. The translator encounters a difficulty here owing to the fact that 
the English word “reflection” has two different meanings which are perfectly 
distinct in French. In discussing the dyad “reflection-reflecting,” Sartre uses 
reflet-reflSiant: Here “reflection” means that which is reflected — ^hke an image 
and easily suggests to Sartre the idea of a game with mirrors. In the 
present section, however, the subject of discussion is reflexion, which means 
0 process of mental reflection in general and in particular introspection. 

^ a feeble attempt to prevent confusion, I am in this section using the 
artic e with reflet, the “reflection” in the dyad, and in some cases I am 
Btvmg the French as well. 

sitnilar but less insoluble difficulty occurs with words deriving from 
c r (to reflect in the sense of reflexion") and refliter (to reflect an 
age). To distinguish these 1 am using the English expression “reflect-on” 
ere mental action is involved. “Reflective” also indicates the mental 
process of reflection. 



214 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

reflective simultaneously be and not be the refiected-on. We 
have already discovered this ontological structure at the 
heart of the for-itself. But then it did not have at all the 
same meaning. In fact it supposed in the two terms “reflected 
and reflecting” a radical Unselbstdndigkeit on the part of the 
suggested duality; that is, such an inability on the part of the 
terms to be posited separately that the duality remained per- 
petually evanescent and each term, while positing itself for 
the other, became the other. But in the case of reflection, the 
case is slightly different since “the reflection-reflecting” 
which is reflected'On exists for a “reflection-reflecting” 
which is reflective. In other words, the reflected-on is an ap- 
pearance for the reflective without thereby ceasing to be wit- 
ness (of) itself, and the reflective is witness of the reflected-on 
without thereby ceasing to be an* appearance to itself. It is 
even in so far as it is reflected in itself {se rcficte en soi) that 
the reflected-on is an appearance for the reflective, and the re- 
flective can be witness only in so far as it is consciousness (of) 
being so; that is, to the exact extent that this witness, which 
it is, is a reflection {reflet) for a reflecting which it is also. Re- 
flected-on and reflective therefore each tend to the Selbstdn- 
digkeit, and the nothing which separates them divides them 
more profoundly than the nothingness of the for-itself sepa- 
rates the reflection (reflet) from the reflecting. 

Yet we must note two things: (1) Reflection (reflexion) 
as witness can have its being as witness only in and through 
the appearance; that is, it is profoundly affected in its being by 
its reflectivity and consequently can never achieve the Selbstdn- 
digkeit at which it aims, since it derives its being from its func- 
tion and its function from the for-itself reflected-on. (2) The 
reflected-on is profoundly altered by reflection (reflexion) in 
this sense that it is self-consciousness as the consciousness re- 
flected-on of this or that transcendent phenomenon. The 
reflected-on knows itself observed. It may best be compared — 
to use a concrete example — ^to a man who is writing, bent 
over a table, and who while writing knows that he is observed 
y somebody who stands behind him. The refiected-on has 
then, in a way, already a consciousness (of) itself as having 
an outside or rather the suggestion of an outside; that is, it 

jlself^ an object for so that its meaning as 

re ec ed-on is inseparable from the reflective and exists over 
ere at a istance from itself in the consciousness which re- 



TEMPORALITY 215 

fleets on it. In this sense the reflected-on does not possess 
Selbstandigkeit any more than the reflective itself. 

Husserl tells us that the reflected-on “gives itself as hav- 
ing been there before reflection.” But we must not be de- 
ceived here; the Selbstandigkeit of the not-reflected-on qua not- 
reflected-on in relation to all possible reflection does not pass 
into the phenomenon of reflection, for the phenomenon loses 
its character as not reflected-on. For a consciousness, to be- 
come reflected-on means to undergo a profound modification 
of its being and precisely to lose the Selbstandigkeit which it 
possessed as the quasi-totality “the reflected-reflecting.” 
Finally, to the extent that a nothingness separates the re- 
flected-on from the reflective, this nothingness, which cannot 
derive its being from itself, must “be made-to-be.” Let us 
understand by this that only a unitary structure of being 
can be its own nothingness in the form of having to be 
it. In fact neither the reflective nor the reflected-on can issue 
this separating nothingnesss. But reflection is one being, 
just like the unreflective for-itself, not an addition of being; it 
is a being which has to be its own nothingness. It is not the 
appearance of a new consciousness directed on the for-itself 
but an intra-structural modification which the for-itself realizes 
in itself; in a word it is the for-itself which makes itself 
exist in the mode reflective-reflected-on, instead of being 
simply in the mode of the dyad reflection-reflecting; further- 
more, this new mode of being allows the mode of the re- 
flection-reflecting to subsist as a primary inner structure. The 
one who is reflecting on me is not some sort of non- 
temporal regard but myself, myself who am enduring engaged 
in the circuit of my selfness, in danger in the world, with my 
historicity. This historicity and this being-in-the-world and 
this circuit of selfness — these the for-itself which I am lives in 
the mode of the reflective dissociation (dedoublement) . 

As we have seen, the reflective is separated from the re- 
flected-on by a nothingness. Thus the phenomenon of re- 
flection is a nihil ation of the for-itself, a nihilation which does 
i^t come to it from without but which it has to be. Where is 

me origin of this further nihilation? What can be its motiva- 
tion? 

1 },^^ upsurge of the for-itself as presence to being, 

stc is an original dispersion: the for-itself is lost outside, 
next m the^ in-itself, and in the three temporal ekstases. It is 
ou side of itself, and in its inmost heart this being-for-itself is 



216 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ekstatic since it must look for its being elsewhere — in the re- 
flecting (refietant) if it makes itself a reflection (reflet), in 
the reflection if it posits itself as reflecting. The upsurge of 
the for-itself confirms the failure of the in-itself, which has 
not been able to be its own foundation. Reflection (reflexion) 
remains for the for-itself a permanent possibility, an attempt 
to recover being. By reflection the for-itself, which has 
lost itself outside itself, attempts to put itself inside its own 
being. Reflection is a second effort by the for-itself to found 
itself; that is, to be for itself what it is. Indeed if the quasi- 
dyad the reflection-reflecting were gathered up into a totality 
for a witness which would be itself, it would be in its own 
eyes what it is. The goal in short is to overtake that being 
which flees itself while being what it is in the mode of not- 
being and which flows on while being its own flow, which 
escapes between its own fingers; the goal is to make of it a 
given, a given which finally is what it is; the problem is to 
gather together in the unity of one regard this unachieved 
totality which is unachieved only because it is to itself its own 
non-achievement, to escape from the sphere of the perpetual 
reference which has to be a reference to itself, and — ^precisely 
because it has escaped from the chains of this reference — ^to 
make it be as a seen reference — ^that is, as a reference which 
is what it is. 

But at the same time it is necessary that this being which 
recovers itself and establishes itself as a given — that is, which 
confers on itself the contingency of being in order to preserve 
it while founding it — this must itself be that which it re- 
covers and founds, that which it preserves from the ekstatic 
scattering. The motivation of reflection (reflexion) consists in 
a double attempt, simultaneously an objectivation and an in- 
teriorization. To be to itself as an object-in-itself in the abso- 
lute unity of interiorization — that is what the being-of-reflec- 
tion has to be. 

This effort to be to itself its own foundation, to recover 
and to dominate within itself its own flight, finally to be that 
flight instead of temporalizing it as the flight which is fled — 
this effort inevitably results in failure; and it is precisely this 
failure which is reflection. In fact it is itself the being which 
has to recover the being which is lost, and it must be this 
recovery in the mode of being which is its own; that is, in the 
mode of the for-itself, therefore of flight. It is qua for-itself 


TEMPORALITY 


217 


that the for-itself will try to be what it is or, if you prefer, it 
will be for itself what it is-for-itself. Thus reflection or the 
attempt to recover the for-itself by a turning back on itself 
results in the appearance of the for-itself for the for-itself. 
The being which wants to find a foundation in being is itself 
the foundation only of its own nothingness. The ensemble 
consequently remains a nihilated in-itself. At the same time 
the turning back of being on itself can only cause the appear- 
ance of a distance between what turns back and that on which 
it turns. This turning back upon the self is a wrenching 
away from self in order to return to it. It is this turning back 
which effects the appearance of reflective nothingness. For 
the necessary structure of the for-itself requires that its being 
can be recovered only by a being which itself exists in the 
form of for-itself.® Thus the being which effects the recovery 
must be constituted in the mode of the for-itself, and the 
being which is to be recovered must exist as for-itself. And 
these two beings must be the same being. But exactly in so far 
as this being recovers itself, it causes an absolute distance to 
exist between itself and itself — in the unity of being. This 
phenomenon of reflection is a permanent possibility of the 
for-itself because reflective scissiparity exists potentially in the 
for-itself which is reflected-on; it suffices in fact that the re- 
flecting for-itself {refletant) posit itself for it as a witness of 
the reflection (reflet) and that the for-itself (the reflection) 
posit itself for it as a reflection of this reflecting. Thus reflec- 
tion (reflexion) as the effort of a for-itself to recover a for- 
itself which it is in the mode of non-being is a stage of 
nihilation intermediate between the pure and simple existence 
of the for-itself and existence for-others; it is an act on the 
part of a for-itself to recover a for-itself which it is not in the 
mode of non-being.® 

Can reflection thus described be limited in its laws and its 
scope by the fact that the for-itself temporalizes itself? We 
think not. 

We must distinguish two kinds of reflection if we wish to 

® Tr. The French says "without the form of,” which makes no sense and 
must surely be a misprint. 

We find here again that “division , of the equal to itselT* which Hegel 
makes the peculiar trait of consciousness. But this division instead of 
ea mg to a higher integration, as in the Phenomenology of Mind, only 
es deeper and more irremediable the nothingness which separates 
onsciousness from itself. Consciousness is Hegelian, but it is Hegel s 
Breatest illusion. 



218 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

grasp the reflective phenomenon in its relations with tem- 
porality: reflection can be either pure or impure. Pure reflec- 
tion, the simple presence of the reflective for-itself to the for- 
itself reflected-on, is at once the original form of reflection 
and its ideal form; it is that on whose foundation impure 
reflection appears, it is that also which is never first given; 
and it is that which must be won by a sort of katharsis. Impure 
or accessory reflection, of which we will speak later, includes 
pure reflection but surpasses it and makes further claims. 

What are the evident claims and rights of pure re- 
flection? Evidently the reflective is the reflected-on. Outside 
of that we should have no means of legitimizing reflection. 
But the reflective is the reflected-on in complete immanence 
although in the form of “not-being-in-itself.” It is this which 
well demonstrates the fact that the reflected-on is not wholly 
an object but a quasi-object for reflection. Actually the con- 
sciousness reflected-on is not presented yet as something out- 
side reflection — ^that is, as a being on which one can “take a 
point of view,” in relation to which one can realize a with- 
drawal, increase or diminish the distance which separates one 
from it. In order for the consciousness reflected-on to be 
“viewed from without” and in order for reflection to be able 
to orient itself in relation to it, it would be necessary that the 
reflective should not be the reflected-on in the mode of not 
being what it is not: the scissiparity wUl be realized only in 
existence for~others. 

Reflection is a knowledge; of that there is no doubt It is 
provided with a positional character; it affirms the conscious- 
ness reflected-on. But every afSrmation, as we shall soon see, 
is conditioned by a negation: to affirm this object is simul- 
taneously to deny that I am this object. To know is to make 
oneself other. Now the reflective can not make itself wholly 
other than the reflected-on since it is-in-order-to-be the re- 
flected-on. Its affirmation is stopped halfway because its nega- 
tion is not entirely realized. It does not then detach itself 
completely from the reflected-on, and it can not grasp the re- 
fiected-on “from a point of view.” Its knowledge is a totality; 
it is a lightning intuition without relief, without point of de- 
parture, and without point of arrival. Everything is given at 
once in a sort of absolute proximity. What we ordinarily call 
knowing supposes reliefs, levels, an order, a hierarchy. Even 
mathematical essences are revealed to us with an orientation 
m relation to other truths, to certain consequences; they are 



TEMPORALITY 


219 


never disclosed with all their characteristics at once. But the 
reflection which delivers the reflected-on to us, not as a given 
but as the. being which we have to be, in indistinction without 
a point of view, is a knowledge overflowing itself and without 
explanation. At the same time it is never surprised by itself; it 
does not teach us anything but only posits. In the knowledge 
of a transcendent object indeed there is a revelation of the ob- 
ject, and the object revealed can deceive or surprise us. But 
in the reflective revelation there is a positing of a being whose 
being was already a revelation. Reflection is limited to making 
this revelation exist for itself; the revealed being is not re- 
vealed as a given but with the character of the “already re- 
vealed.” Reflection is a recognition rather than knowledge. It 
implies as the original motivation of the recovery a pre- 
reflective comprehension of what it wishes to recover. 

But if the reflective is the reflected-on, if this unity of 
being founds and limits the laws of reflection, it should be 
added that the reflected-on, itself, is its past and its future. 
There is then no doubt that although the totality of the re- 
flected-on, which the reflective is in the mode of non-being, 
perpetually overflows the reflective, still the reflective extends 
its apodictic laws to that very totality which it is. Thus the 
reflective achievement of Descartes, the cogito, must not be 
limited to the infinitesimal instant. Moreover this conclusion 
could be drawn from the fact that thought is an act which en- 
gages the past and shapes its outline by the future. I doubt 
Aerefore that I am, said Descartes. But what would remain of 
methodological doubt if it could be limited to the instant? A 
suspension of judgment, perhaps. But a suspension of judg- 
ment is not a doubt; it is only a necessary structure of doubt. 
In order for doubt to exist, it is necessary that this suspension 
be motivated by an insuflaciency of reasons for affirming or for 
denying — ^which refers to the past — and that it be maintained 
deliberately until the intervention of new elements — ^which 
is already a project of the future. Doubt appears on the foun- 
dation of a pre-ontological comprehension of knowing and of 
requirements concerning truth. This comprehension and these 
requirements, which give all its meaning to doubt, engage the 
totality of human reality and its being in the world; they sup- 
pose the existence of an object of knowledge and of doubt 
■^that is, of a transcendent permanence in universal time. It 
IS then a related conduct which doubts the object, a conduct 
Which represents one of the modes of the being-in-the-world 



220 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

\ 

of human reality. To discover oneself doubting is already to be 
ahead of oneself in the future, which conceals the end, the 
cessation, and the meaning of this doubt, and to be belmd 
oneself in the past, which conceals the constituent motivations 
of the doubt and its stages of development, and to be outside 
of oneself in the world as presence to the object which one 
doubts. ^ 

These ' same observations would apply to any reflective 
statement: I read, I dream, I perceive, I act. Either they should 
lead us to refuse to grant apodictic evidence to reflection, and 
then the original knowledge which I have of myself would 
melt into mere probability and my ^ very existence is only a 
probability (for my being-in-the-instant is not a being) — or 
else we must extend the laws of reflection to human totality — 
i.e., to the past, to the future, to presence, to the object But 
if we have observed accurately, reflection is the for-itself 
which seeks to recover itself as a totality in perpetual in- 
completion. It is the affir mation of the revelation of the being 
which is to itself its own revelation. As the for-itself temporal- 
izes itself, there are these results: (1) Reflection, as the mode 
of being of the for-itself, must be as temporalization, and it is 
itself its past and its future. (2) By nature reflection extends 
its laws and its certitude to the possibilities which I am and 
to the past which I was. The reflective is not the apprehen- 
sion of an instantaneous reflected-on, but neither is it itself 
instantaneity. This does not mean that the reflective knows 
with its future the future of the reflected-on and with its past 
the past of the consciousness to be known. On the contrary 
it is by means of the future and the past that the reflective 
and the reflected-on are distinguished within the imity of their 
being. The future of the reflective, in fact, is the ensemble of 
ite own possibilities which the reflective has to be qua reflec- 
tive. As such it could not include a consciousness of the future 
reflected-on. The same remarks would be valid for the reflec- 
tive past although this is founded ultimately in the past of the 
original for-itself. But if reflection derives its meaning from its 
future and its past, it is already as a fleeing presence to a 
flight, ekstatically the whole length of this flight. In other 
words the for-itself, which makes itself exist in the mode of 
e reflective^ d^sociation, as for-itself derives its meaning 
rom its possibilities and from its future. In this sense reflec- 
tion IS a diasporatic phenomenon; but as a presence to itself, 



TEMPORALITY 221 

the for-itself is a presence present to all its ekstatic dimen- 
sions. 

It remains to explain, someone may say, how this reflection, 
which you are claiming to be apodictic, can make so many 
errors with respect to just that past which you give it the 
capacity to know. I reply that it is free from any error to the 
exact extent that it apprehends the past as that which haunts 
the present in non-thematic form. When I say, “I read, I 
doubt, I hope, etc” as we have shown, I reach beyond my 
present toward the past. Now I cannot in any of these cases be 
mistaken. The apodictic nature of reflection allows no doubt 
in so far as it apprehends the past exactly as it is for the 
consciousness reflected-on which has to be it. On the other 
hand, I can make many an error when recalling to myself in 
the reflective mode my past feelings or my past ideas; this is 
because I am on the plane of memory. At that moment I no 
longer am my past but I am thematizing it. We are then no 
longer dealing with the reflective act. 

Thus reflection is consciousness of the three ekstatic 
dimensions. It is a non-thetic consciousness (of) flow and a 
thetic consciousness of duration. For reflection the past and 
the present of the reflected-on are set in existence as quasi- 
outside in this sense: that they are not only held in the unity 
of a for-itself which exhausts their being in having to be it 
1 but also for a for-itself which is separated from them by a 
; nothingness; they are for a for-itself which, while existing 
[ with them in the unity of a being, does not have to be their 
being. Through reflection also the flow reaches toward being 
as an “outside” outlined in immanence. But pure reflection 
I still discovers temporality only in its own original non-sub- 
I stantiality, in its refusal to be in-itself. It discovers possibles qua 
1 possibles, lightened by the freedom of the for-itself. It reveals 
! the present as transcendent; and if the past appears to it as in- 
itself, still the past is on the foundation of presence. Finally 
reflection discovers the for-itself in its detotalized totality as 
the incomparable individuality which reflection itself is in the 
mode of having to be it. It discovers the for-itself as the “re- 
flected-on, par excellence,” the being which is always only as 
Itself and which is always this “self” at a distance from itself, 
m the future, in the past, in the world. Reflection therefore 
apprehends temporality and reveals it as the unique and in- 

, comparable mode of being of a selfness — ^that is, as his- 
toricity. 


222 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

But the psychological duration which we know, and which 
we daily make use of as successions of organized temporal 
forms is the opposite of historicity. It is in fact the concrete 
fabric of the psychic unities of the flow. This joy, for example, 
is an organized form which appears after a sadness, and before 
that there was that humiliation which I experienced yester- 
day. Relations of before and after are commonly established 
between these unities of flow, qualities, states, acts; and these 
are the unities which can be used for dating. Thus the reflec- 
tive consciousness of man-in-the-world in his daily existence 
is found in the face of psychic objects which are what they 
are, which appear in the continuous woof of our temporality 
like the designs and motifs on a tapestry, and which succeed 
each other in the manner of things in the world in universal 
time; that is, by replacing each other without entering into 
any relation other than the purely external relations of succes- 
sion. 

We speak of a joy which I have or which I had; we say 
that it is my joy as if I were its support and as if it were 
detached from me as the finite modes of Spinoza are detached 
from the ground of the attribute. We even say that I experi- 
ence this joy as if it came to imprint itself like a seal on 
the texture of my teraporalization; or better yet, as if the pres- 
ence in me of these feelings, of these ideas, of these states 
were a sort of visitation. We can not call it an illusion — ^this 
psychic duration constituted by the concrete flow of autono- 
mous organizations; that is, in short, by the succession 
of psychic facts, of facts of consciousness. Indeed it is their 
reality which is the object of psychology. Practically it is on 
the level of psychic fact that concrete relations between men 
are established claims, jealousies, grudges, suggestions, strug- 
gles, ruses, etc. Yet it is not conceivable that the unreflective 
for-itself, which historicizes itself^® in its upsurge, should be 
itself these qualities, these states, and these acts. Its unity of 
being would dissolve into a multiplicity of existents external 
to one another, the^ ontological problem of temporality would 
reappear, and this time we would have removed all methods of 
resolving it; for while it is possible for the for-itself to be its 
own past, it would be absurd to require of my joy that it be 

Itself in history or makes itself a history. Sartre uses 

» bears the same relation to French that “historicizes 

Itself bears to Enghsh. 



TEMPORALITY 223 

the sadness which preceded it, even in the mode of “non- 
being.” 

Psychologists give a degraded representation of this ekstat- 
ic existence when they affirm that psychic facts are relative 
to one another and that the thunder clap heard after a long 
silence is apprehended as “thunder-clap-after-a-long-silence.” 
This observation is well made, but they have prevented them- 
selves from explaining this relativity in succession since they 
have removed from it all ontological foundation. In fact if we 
apprehend the for-itself in its historicity, psychic duration 
vanishes and states, qualities, and acts disappear to give place 
to being-for-itself as such, which is only as the unique in- 
dividuality from which the process of historization cannot be 
separated. It is this which flows, which calls to itself from the 
ground of the future, and which is heavy with the past which 
it was; it is this which historicizes its selfness, and we know 
that it is — in the primary or unreflective mode — a conscious- 
ness of the world and not of self. Thus qualities and states 
could not be beings in its being (in the sense that the unity of 
the flow of joy would be “contained” or “made” by con- 
sciousness) . There exist only the internal, non-positional color- 
ations of it; these are nothing other than itself qua for-itself, 
and they can not be apprehended outside of it. 

Here we are then in the presence of two temporalities: 
the original temporality of which we are the temporaliza- 
tion, and psychic temporality which simultaneously appears as 
incompatible with the mode of being of our being and as an 
inter-subjective reality, the object of science, the goal of hu- 
man acts (in the sense, for example, that I do ever5ffiiing 
possible to ''make Annie love me" to “endow her with love 
for me”). This psychic temporality, which is evidently de- 
rived, can not stem directly from original temporality; the 
latter constitutes nothing other than itself. As for psychic 
temporality, it is incapable of constituting itself, for it is only 
a successive order of facts. Moreover psychic temporality 
could not appear to the unreflective for-itself, which is pure 
ekstatic presence to the world. Psychic temporality reveals it- 
self to reflection, and reflection must constitute it But how 
can reflection constitute it if reflection is the pure and simple 
discovery of the historicity which it is? 

Here we must distinguish between pure reflection and im- 
pure or constituent reflection, for it is impure reflection which 
constitutes the succession of psychic facts or psyche. What 



224 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

is given first in daily life is impure or constituent reflection al- 
thou^ this includes pure reflection as its original structure. 
But pure reflection can be attained only as the result of a mod- 
ification which it effects on itself and which is in the form of 
a katharsis. This is not the place to describe the motivation 
and the structure of this katharsis. What matters to us is the 
description of impure reflection inasmuch as. it constitutes 
and reveals psychic temporality. 

Reflection, as we have seen, is a type of being in which 
the for-itself is in order to be to itself what it is. Reflection is 
not then a capricious upsurge into the pure indifference of 
being, but it arises in the perspective of a for. We have seen 
here that the for-itself is the being which in its being is the 
foundation of a for. The meaning of reflection is then its 
being-for. Specifically the reflective is the reflected-on nihilat- 
ing itself for^^ recovering itself. In this sense the reflective, in 
so far as it has to be the reflected-on, escapes from the 
for-itself which it is as reflective in the form of “having to 
be it.” But if it were only in order to be the reflected on which 
it has to be, it would escape from the for-itself in order to 
rediscover it; everywhere and in whatever manner it affects 
itself, the for-itself is condemned to be-for-itself. In fact, it is 
here that pure reflection is discovered. 

But impure reflection, which is the first spontaneous 
(but not the original) reflective movement, is-in-order-to-be 
the reflected-on as in-itself. Its motivation is within it in the 
twofold movement, which we have already described, of in- 
teriorization and of objectivation: to apprehend the reflected- 
on as in-itself in order to make itself be that in-itself which 
is apprehended. Impure reflection then is the apprehension 
of the reflected-on as such only in a circuit of selfness in 
which reflection stands in immediate relation with an in- 
itself which it has to be. But on the other hand, this in-itself 
which reflection has to be, is the reflected-on in so far as the 
reflective tries to^ apprehend it as being in-itself. This means 
that three forms exist in impure reflection: the reflective, the 
reflected-on, and an in-itself which the reflective has to be in 
so far as this in-itself would be the reflected-on, an in-itself 
which is nothing other than the For of the reflective phenom- 
enon. This in-itself is pre-outlined behind the for-itself — 
reflected-on, by a reflection {reflexion) which traverses the 

Tr. Etre-pour. In French the pour can mean either for or in order 
to, both of which are impUed in etre-pour. 


TEMPORALITY 


225 


refiected-on in order to recover it and to found it; it is like 
the projection into the in-itself on the part of the for-itself 
reflected-on — as a meaning: its being is not to be but to be- 
made-to-be, like nothingness. It is the reflected-on as a pure 
object for the reflective; as soon as reflection adopts a point of 
view on the reflective, as soon as it gets out of that lightning 
intuition without relief in which the reflected-on is given with- 
out a point of view for the reflective, as soon as it posits itself 
as not being the reflected-on, and as soon as it determines 
what the reflected-on is, then reflection effects the appearance 
of an in-itself capable of being determined, qualified, behind 
the reflected-on. This transcendent in-itself or shadow cast by 
the reflected-on onto being is what the reflective has to be in 
so far as it is that which the reflected-on is. 

Yet this in-itself should not be confused with the value 
of the reflected-on, which is given to reflection in a total, 
undifferentiated intuition — ^nor with the value which haunts 
the reflective as a non-thetic absence and as the For of 
reflective consciousness in so far as it is a non-positional self- 
consciousness. This in-itself is the necessary object of all 
reflection. In order that it may arise, it is enough that reflec- 
tion confront the reflected-on as object. It is the very decision 
by which reflection determines itself to consider the reflected- 
on as object which causes the in-itself to appear as the tran- 
scendent objectivation of the reflected-on. The act by which 
reflection determines itself to take the reflected-on as object 
is itself (1) a positing of the reflective as not being the re- 
flected-on, (2) the adoption of a point of view in relation to 
the reflected-on. Moreover in reality these two moments make 
only one since the concrete negation which the reflective 
makes itself be in relation to the reflected-on manifests itself 
precisely in and through the fact of taking a point of view. 
The objectivating act, as we see, lies in the strict extensions 
of the reflective dissociation since this dissociation is made by 
the deepening of the nothingness which separates the reflection 
(reflet) from the reflecting (refletant). The objectivation re- 
covers the reflective movement as not being the reflected-on 
in order that the reflected-on may appear as an object for the 
reflective. 

However this reflection is in bad faith. To be sure, it 
appears to cut the bond which unites the reflected-on to the 



226 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

reflective, and it seems to declare that the reflective is not the 
reflected-on in the mode of not being what one is not, at a 
time when in the original reflective upsurge, the reflective 
is not the reflected-on in the mode of what one is. But this 
is only in order to recover subsequently the affirmation of 
identity and to affirm concerning this in-itself that “I am zf.” 
In a word, reflection is in bad faith in so far as it constitutes 
itself as the revelation of the object which I make-to-be-me. 
But in the second place this more radical nihilation is not a 
real, metaphysical event The real event, the third process of 
nihilation is the for-others. Impure reflection is an abortive 
effort on the part of the for-itself to be another while remain- 
ing itself. The transcendent object which appeared behind the 
for-itself-reflected-on is the only being of which the reflective 
can say — in this sense — that it is not it. But it is a mere 
shadow of being. It is made-to-be and the reflective has to be 
it in order not to be it. It is this shadow of being, the neces- 
sary and constant correlate of impure reflection that the psy- 
chologist studies under the name of psychic fact. A psychic 
fact is then the shadow of the reflected-on inasmuch as the 
reflective has to be it ekstatically in the mode of non-being. 
Thus reflection is impure when it gives itself as an “intuition 
of the for-itself in in-itself.” What is revealed to it is not the 
temporal and non-substantial historicity of the reflected-on; 
beyond this reflected-on it is the very substantiality of the 
organized forms of the flow. The unity of these virtual beings 
is called the psychic life or psyche, a virtual and transcendent 
in-itself which underlies the temporalization of the for-itself. 
Pure reflection is never anything but a quasi-knowledge; but 
there can be a reflective knowledge of the Psyche alone. 
Naturally we will rediscover in each psychic object the 
characteristics of the real reflected-on but degraded in the In- 
itself. A brief a priori description of the Psyche will enable us 
to account for this In-itself. 

(1) By Psyche we understand the Ego, its states, its quali- 
acts. The Ego with the double grammatical form 
of “I” and “Me” represents our person as a transcendent psy- 
chic unity. We have described it elsewhere. It is as the Ego 
that we are. subjects in fact and subjects in theory, active and 
passive, voluntary agents, possible objects of a judgment con- 
cerning value of responsibility. 

The qualities of the Ego represent the ensemble of vir- 
tues, latent traits, potentialities which constitute our charac- 



TEMPORALITY 


227 


ter and our habits (in the sense of the Greek 'eft- )• The Ego 
is a “quality” of being angry, industrious, jealous, ambitious, 
sensual, etc. But we must recognize also qualities of another 
sort which have their origin in our history and which we call 
acquired traits: I can be “showing my age," tired, bitter, 
declining, progressing; I can appear as “having acquired as- 
surance as the result of a success” or on the contrary as 
“having little by little contracted the tastes, the habits, the 
sexuality of an invalid” (following a long illness). 

States — ^in contrast with qualities which exist “potentially” 
— give themselves as actually existing. Hate, love, jealousy are 
states. An illness, in so far as it is apprehended by the patient 
as a psycho-physiological reality, is a state. In the same way a 
number of characteristics which are externally attached to my 
person can, in so far as I live them, become states. Absence 
(in relation to a definite person), exile, dishonor, triumph are 
states. We can see what distinguishes the quality from the 
state: After my anger yesterday, my “irascibility” survives as a 
simple latent disposition to become angry. On the contrary, 
after Pierre’s action and the resentment which I felt because of 
it, my hate -survives as an actual reality although my thought 
may be currently occupied with another object A quality 
furthermore is an innate or acquired disposition which con- 
tributes to qualify my personality. The state, on the contrary, 
is much more accidental and contingent; it is something 
which happens to me. There exist however intermediates 
between states and qualities: for example, the hatred of 
Pozzo di Borgo for Napoleon, although existing in fact and 
representing an affective, contingent relation between Pozzo 
and Napoleon the First, was constitutive of the person Pozzo. 

By acts we must understand the whole synthetic activity 
of the person; that is, every disposition of means as related to 
ends, not as the for-itself is its own possibilities but as the 
act represents a transcendent psychic synthesis which the for- 
itself must live. For example, the boxer’s training is an act 
because it transcends and supports the For-itself, which more- 
over realizes itself in and through this training. The same 
goes for the re.<;earch of the scientist, for the work of the artist, 
for the election campaign of the politician. In all these cases 
the act as a psychic being represents a transcendent existence 
and the objective aspect of the relation of the For-itself with 
the world. 

(2) The “Psychic” is given solely to a special category of 



228 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

cognitive acts— the acts of the reflective For-itseif. On the 
unreflective plane, in fact, the For-itself is its own possibilities 
in the non-thetic mode; and since its possibilities are possible 
presences to the world beyond the given state of the world, 
what is revealed thetically but non-thematically across these 
possibilities is a state of the world synthetically bound with 
the given state. Consequently the modifications to be imposed 
on the world are given thetically in present things as objective 
potentialities which have to realize themselves by borrowing 
our body as the instrument of their realization. It is thus that 
the man who is angry sees on the face of his opponent the 
objective quality of asking for a punch in the nose. Hence 
we have such expressions as “itching to be spanked” or “ask- 
ing for trouble,”i 2 Our body here is like a medium in a trance. 
Through it must be realized a certain potentiality of things 
(a beverage-about-to-be-drunk, aid-about-to-be-brought, dan- 
gerous-animal-about-to-be-ldlled, etc.), and reflection arising 
in the midst of all these apprehends the ontological relation 
of the For-itself to its possibilities but as an object. Thus the 
act rises as the virtual object of the reflective 'consciousness. 
It is then impossible for me at the same time and on the same 
level to be conscious of Pierre and of my friendship for him; 
these two existences are always separated by the breadth of the 
. For-itself. And this For-itself is a hidden reality; in the case 
of consciousness not-reflected-on, the For-itself is, but non-thet- 
ically, and it is effaced before the object in the world and its 
potentialities. In the case of the reflective upsurge the for-itself 
is surpassed toward the virtual object which the reflective has 
to be. Only a pure reflective consciousness can discover the 
For-itself reflected-on in its reality. We use the term Psyche 
for the organized totality of these virtual and transcendent 
e^stents which form a permanent cortege for impure reflec- 
tion and which are the natural object of psychological XQSCcirch. 

(3) The objects although virtual are not abstract; the 
reflective does not aim at them in emptiness; they are given as 
the concrete in-itself which the reflective has to be beyond the 

Tr. The French expressions here have no close English equivalent. "Tete 
<5 gifles is a head for slaps”; ’’menton gui attire les coups” is a ‘‘chin 
which attracts blows.” Cf. Goneril’s taunt in King Lear: 

‘‘Milk-liver’d man! 

That bear st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs.” 

(IV.ii) 



TEMPORALITY 


229 


reflected-on. We shall use the term evidence for the immediate 
presence “in person” of hate, exile, systematic doubt in the 
reflective For-itself. To be convinced that this presence exists, 
it is enough to call to mind cases in our own personal experi- 
ence when we have tried to recall a dead love or a certain in- 
tellectual atmosphere which we had lived at an earlier date. 
On such occasions we had plainly a consciousness of aiming 
in emptiness at these various objects. We could form partic- 
ular concepts of them, attempt a literary description of them, 
but we knew that they were not there. Similarly there are 
intermittent periods for a living love during which we know 
that we love but we do not feel it. These “intermittences in 
the heart” have been very well described by Proust. In con- 
trast, it is possible to grasp a love in fullness, to contemplate 
it. But for that is necessary a particular mode of being on the 
part of the For-itself reflected-on. I can apprehend my friend- 
ship for Pierre, but it is through my sympathy, which at the 
moment has become the object reflected-on by a reflective con- 
sciousness. In short, the only way to make-present these quali- 
ties, these states, or these acts is to apprehend them across a 
consciousness reflected-on of which they are the objectivation, 
the shadow cast onto the in-itself. 

But this possibility .of making-present a love proves better 
than any argument the transcendence of the psychic. When I 
abruptly discover, when I see my love, I apprehend at the 
same stroke that it stands before my consciousness. I can take 
points of view regarding it, can judge it; I am not engaged in 
it as the reflective is in the reflected-on. Due to this very fact 
I apprehend it as not being of the nature of the For-it- 
self, It is infinitely heavier, more opaque, more solid than that 
absolute transparency. That is why the evidence with which 
Ae psychic gives itself to the intuition of impure reflection 
IS not apodictic. There is a cleavage between the future of the 
For-itself reflected-on, which is constantly eaten away and 
lightened by my freedom, and the dense and menacing future 
of my love, a cleavage which gives to it precisely its meaning 
as love. If I did not apprehend in the psychic object a love 
with its future arrested, would it still be love? Would it not 
rather fall under the heading of caprice? And does not even 
the caprice engage the future to the extent that it is given as 
going to remain caprice and never to be changed into love? 
Thus the always nihilated future of the For-itself prevents all 
determination in itself within the For-itself as the For-itself 



230 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


which loves or which hates; and the shadow projected by the 
For-itself reflected-on possesses naturally a degraded future in 
in-itself, one which forms an integral part of it in deter- 
mining its meaning. But in correlation with the continual 
nihilation of Futures reflected-on, the organized psychic 
ensemble with its future remains only probable. And we 
need not understand by that an external quality which would 
come from a relation with my knowledge and which could 
be transformed if need be into certainty, but rather an on- 
tological characteristic. 

(4) The psychic object, being the shadow cast by the 
For-itself reflected-on, possesses in degraded form the charac- 
teristics of consciousness. In particular it appears as an un- 
achieved and probable totality there where the For-itself makes 
itself exist in the diasporatic unity of a detotalized totality. 
This means that the Psychic, apprehended across the three 
ekstatic dimensions of temporality, appears as constituted by 
the synthesis of a Past, a Present, and a Future. A love, an 
enterprise is the organized unity of these three dimensions. In 
fact it is not enough to say that a love “has” a future as if 
the future were external to the object which it characterizes; 
the future makes a part of the organized form of the flow of 
“love,” for love is given its meaning as love by its being in the 
future. But due to the fact that the psychic object is in-itself, 
its present can not be flight, nor can its future be pure possi- 
bility. In these forms of flow there is an essential priority of 
the Past, which is what the For-itself ivo-r and which already 
presupposes the transformation of the For-itself into In-itself. 
The reflective projects a psychic object provided with the 
three temporal dimensions, but it constitutes these three di- 
mensions solely out of what the reflected-on was. The Future is 
already; otherwise how could my love be love? Only it is not 
yet given; it is “now” which is not yet revealed. It loses then 
its character as a possibility which-l-hav e-to-be; my love, my 
joy do not have to be their future, for they are it in the tran- 
quil indifference of juxtaposition, just as this fountain pen is 
at once a pen and — below — a cap. The Present similarly is 
apprehended in its real quality of being-there. Only this 
being-there is constituted in having been-there. The Present is 
already wholly constituted and armed from head to foot; it 
is a now” which the instant brings and carries away like a 
costume ready made; it is a card which comes out of the game 
and returns to it. The passage of a “now” from the future 



TEMPORALITY 


231 


to the present and from the present to the past does not cause 
it to undergo any modification since in any case, future or not, 
is is already past. This fact is well illustrated by the na’ive way 
in which psychologists take recourse in the unconscious in or- 
der to distinguish the three “nows” of the psychic: they call 
present the “now” which is present to the consciousness. 
Those which have passed ■ into the future have exactly the 
same characteristics, but they wait in the limbo of the uncon- 
scious; and if we take them in that undifferentiated environ- 
ment, it is impossible to distinguish past from future among 
them. A memory which survives in the unconscious is a past 
“now” and at the same time, inasmuch as it awaits being 
evoked, it is a future “now.” Thus the psychic form is not 
to-be; it is already made; it is already complete, past, present, 
future, in the mode has been. The “nows” which compose it 
have only to undergo one by one — before returning into the 
past — ^the baptism of consciousness. 

The result is that the psychic form contains two co- 
existing contradictory modalities of being since it is already 
made and appears in the cohesive unity of an organism and 
since at the same time it can exist only through a succession 
of “nows,” each one of which tends to be isolated in an in- 
itself. Thus joy, for example, passes from one instant to an- 
other because its future exists already as a terminal result and 
the given meaning of its development, not as that which it 
has to be, but as that which it “has been” already in the 
future. 

Actually this inner cohesion of the psyche is nothing other 
Aan the unity of being of the For-itself hypostasized in the 
in-itself. A hate has no parts; it is not a sum of attitudes and 
of states of consciousness, but it gives itself through the 
attitudes and states of consciousness as the temporal unity — 
without parts — of their appearances. But the unity of being in 
the For-itself is explained by the ekstatic character of its 
being; it has to be in full spontaneity what it will be. The 
psychic, on the contrary, “is made-to-be.” This means that it 
is by itself incapable of determining itself in existence. It is 
sustained in the face of the reflective by a sort of inertia; and 
psychologists have often insisted on its “pathological” charac- 
ter. It is in this sense that Descartes can speak of the “passions 
of the soul.” Although the psychic is not on the same plane 
of being as the existents of the world, this inertia enables tlie 
psychic to be apprehended as related to these existents. A love 



232 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


is given as “aroused” by the loved object. Consequently the 
total cohesion of the psychic form becomes unintelligible since 
it does not have to be this cohesion, since it is not its own 
synthesis, since its unity has the character of a given. To the 
extent that a hatred is a given succession of “nows,” all com- 


pletely formed and inert, we find in it the germ of an infinite 
divisibility. And yet this divisibility is disguised, denied in so 
far as the psychic is the objectivation of the ontological unity 
of the For-itself. Hence there is a sort of magic cohesion be- 
tween the successive “nows” of the hatred,- which give them- 
selves as parts only in order later to deny their exteriority. 

The ambiguity is brought to light in Bergson’s theory of 
the consciousness which endures and which is a “multiplicity 
of interpenetration.” What Bergson is touching on here is the 
psychic state, not consciousness conceived as For-iself. Actu- 
ally what is the meaning of “interpenetration”? On the 
theory of divisibility, it can not be absence. K there is to 


be interpenetration, it is necessary that there be parts which 
interpenetrate each other. But these parts, which theoretically 
ought to fall back into their isolation, flow one into the other 
by a magic and totally unexplained cohesion; and this total 
fusion at present defies analysis. Bergson does not dream of 
establishing this property of the psychic on an absolute struc- 
Pf For-itself. He establishes it as a given, a simple 
mtuition which reveals to hun that the psychic is an inte- 
riorized multiplicity. Its character as something inert, as a pas- 
sive datum is accentuated by the fact that it exists without 
being for a consciousness, either tlietic or non-thetic. It is 
without consciousness (of) being since in a natural attitude 
man completely fails to recognize it and has to have recourse to 
intumqn in order to apprehend it. Thus an object in the 
world IS able to exist without being seen and to reveal itself 
^ eventwhen we have forged the necessary instruments 
to disclose It. The characteristics of psychic duration for Berg- 
son are a pure contingent fact of experience; they are so be- 
k so— that is all. Thus psychic temporality 

, otu/n, closely akin to Bergson’s duration, which 

intimate cohesion without effecting it, which is 
f- ^ temporahzed without temporalizing itself, in which 
a lona and magic interpenetration of elements that are 
^ ^ ^kstatic relation of being can be compared 

acting from a distance — an inter- 
penetration which hides a multiplicity of already fbrmed 



TEMPORALITY 


233 


“nows.” These characteristics do not result from any error on 
the part of psychologists or from a lack of knowledge; they 
are constitutive of psychic temporality, which is the hypostasis 
of original temporality. The absolute unity of the psychic is 
indeed the projection of the ontological, ekstatic unity of the 
for-itself. But since this projection is made in the in-itself 
which is what it is in the distanceless proximity of self-iden- 
tity, the ekstatic unity parcels itself out in an infinity of 
“nows” which are what they are and which, precisely for this 
reason, tend to isolate themselves in their self-identity. Thus 
participating simultaneously in the in-itself and in the for- 
itself, psychic temporality conceals a contradiction which is 
never overcome. This should not surprise us. Since psychic 
temporality is the product of impure reflection, it is natural 
that it is made-to-be what it is not and that it is not what it 
is made-to-be. ^ 

Following this analysis we may now find more meaningful 
an examination of the inter-relations of psychic forms at the 
heart of psychic time. Let us note first of all that it is inter- 
penetration which governs the connection between feelings, 
for example, at the heart of a complex psychic form. Every- 
body knows those feelings of aflFection “tinted” with envy, 
those hates “penetrated” despite all by admiration, those 
romantic friendships which novelists have often described. 
There is certainly interpenetration as soon as we apprehend a 
friendship tinted with envy like a cup of coffee clouded with 
cream. Admittedly this comparison is gross. Nevertheless 
it is certain that the amorous friendship is not given as a 
simple specification of the genus friendship, as the isosceles 
triangle is a specification of the genus triangle. The friendship 
is given as wholly penetrated by total love, and yet it is not 
love; it “does not make itself” love, for then it would lose its 
autonomy as friendship- But it constitutes itself as an inert 
object in-itself which language can scarcely name, where love, 
autonomous and in-itself, is magically extended through all 
&e friendship just as the foot is extended through all the sea 
in the Stoic (Tvyyvo'is. 

But psychic processes imply also the action from a distance 
of^ prior forms on posterior forms. We cannot conceive of 
this action at a distance in the mode of simple causality found, 
for example, in classical mechanics, which supposes the totally 
inert existence of a moving body enclosed in the instant. 

“ Tr. Correction for Sartre's avyxutrif - 



234 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

Neither can we allow the mode of physical causality con- 
ceived in the manner of John Stuart Mill, which is defined by 
the constant and unconditioned succession of two states 
where the being of each one is exclusive of the other. Inas- 
much as the psychic is the objectivation of the for-itself, it 
possesses a degraded spontaneity which is grasped as the in- 
ternal, given quality of the form of the psychic and which 
is inseparable from its cohesive force. This spontaneity can not 
therefore be given strictly as produced by the prior form. But 
on the other hand, neither can the spontaneity determine itself 
in existence since it is apprehended only as one determination 
among others of a given existent. It follows that the prior form 
has to effect from a distance the birth of a form of the same 
nature which is organized spontaneously as a form of flow. We 
are not dealing here with being which has to be its future 
and its past, but only with successions of past, present, and 
future forms which all exist in the mode of “having-been,” 
and which at a distance influence one another. This influ- 
ence will be manifested either by penetration or by motiva- 
tion. If it is by penetration, the reflective apprehends as a 
single object two psychic objects which had at first been 
given separately. The result is a new psychic object, each 
characteristic of which will be the synthesis of the prior two, 
though this object is unintelligible in itself and gives itself 
simultaneously as all one and all the other without there being 
any alteration in either. In motivation, on the contrary, the two 
objects remain each at its own place. But since a psychic ob- 
ject is an organized form and a multiplicity of interpenetra- 
tion, it can act only simultaneously as one whole on another 
whole object. The result is a total action at a distance by 
means of a magic influence of one on the other. For example, 
my humiliation of yesterday is the total motive for my mood 
this morning, etc. 

The fact that this action at a distance is totally magic and 
irrational proves better than any analysis the futility of 
attempts on the part of intellectualistic psychologists to re- 
main on the level of the psychic and yet deduce this action to 
an intelligible causality by means of an intellectual analysis. 
It is thus that Proust by means of intellectualistic distinctions 
is perpetually trying to find bonds of rational causality be- 
^een psychic states in the temporal succession of these states. 
But at the end of the analysis he can offer us only results such 
as the following: 



TEMPORALITY 


235 


As soon as Swann could picture (Odette) to himself with- 
out revulsion, as soon as he thought again of the kindness 
in her smile, and as soon as the desire to take her away 
from everyone else was no longer added to his love by 
jealousy, that love became again a taste for the sensa- 
tions which Odette’s person gave him, for the pleasure 
which he felt in admiring as a spectacle or in questioning 
as a phenomenon the lifting up of one of her glances, the 
formation of one of her smiles, the utterance of an in- 
tonation of her voice. And this pleasure different from 
all other had ended by creating in him a need of her, 
which she alone could assuage by her presence or her 
letters. . . . Thus by the very chemistry of his affliction, 
after having created jealousy out of his love, he began to 
manufacture tenderness, pity for Odette.^^ 

This passage is obviously concerned with the psychic. 
We see feelings which, individualized and separated by na- 
ture, are here acting one on the other. But Proust is trying to 
clarify their actions and to classify them in the hope that he 
may thereby make understandable the fluctuations which 
Swann experiences. Proust does not limit himself to describing 
the conclusions which he himself has been able to make (e.g., 
the transition through “oscillation” from hate-filled jealousy 
to tender love); he wants to explain these findings. 

What are the results of this analysis? Is the unintelligi- 
bility of the psychic removed? It is easy to see that on the 
contrary this somewhat arbitrary reduction of the great 
psychic forms to more simple elements accentuates the magic 
irrationality of the inter-relations which psychic objects sup- 
port. How does jealousy “add” to love the “desire to take her 
away from everyone else”? And how does this desire once 
added to love (always the image of the cloud of cream 
“added” to the coffee) prevent it from becoming again “a 
taste for the sensations which Odette’s person gave him”? 
And how can the pleasure create a need? And how does 
love manufacture that jealousy which in return will add to 
love the desire to take Odette away from everyone else? And 
how, when freed from this desire, is it going to manufacture 
tenderness anew? Proust here attempts to constitute a symbolic 
chemistry, but the chemical images which he uses are 
capable only of disguising the motivations and irrational acts. 

'^*Du cdtS de chez Swann, 37® edition, 11, p. 82. My italics. 



236 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

It is an attempt to draw us toward a mechanistic interpreta- 
tion of the psychic which, without being any more intelligi- 
ble, would completely distort its nature. And yet Proust can 
not keep from showing us between the estranged states almost 
interhuman relations (to create, to manufacture, to add), 
which would almost allow us to suppose that these psychic 
objects are animated agents. In his descriptions the intellec- 
tualistic analysis shows its limitations at every instant; it can 
effect its distinctions and its classifications only superficially 
and on the basis of total irrationality. It is necessary to give up 
trying to reduce the irrational element in psychic causality. 
This causality is a degradation of the ekstatic for-itself, which 
is its own being at a distance from itself, its degradation into 
magic, into an in-itself which is what it is at its own place. 
Magic action through influence at a distance is the necessary 
result of this relaxation of the bonds of being. The psycholo- 
gist must describe these irrational bonds and take them as an 
original given of the psychic world. 

Thus the reflective consciousness is constituted as con- 
sciousness of duration, and hence psychic duration appears to 
consciousness. This psychic temporality as a projection into 
the in-itself of original temporality is a virtual being whose 
phantom flow does not cease to accompany the ekstatic tem- 
poralization of the for-itself in so far as this is apprehended 
by reflection. But psychic temporality disappears completely 
if the for-itself remains on the un-reflective level or if impure 
reflection purifies itself. Psychic temporality is similar in this 
respect to original temporality — in that it appears as a mode 
of being of concrete objects and not as a limit or a pre- 
established rule. Psychic time is only the connected bringing 
together of temporal objects. But its essential difference from 
original temporality is that it is while original temporality 
temporalizes itself. As such psychic time can be constituted 
only with the past, and the future can be only as a past which 
will come after the present past; that is, the empty form be- 
fore-after is hypostasized, and it orders the relations between 
objects equally past. 

At the same time this psychic duration which can not be 
^ y itself must perpetually be made-to-be. Perpetually oscillat- 
mg between the multiplicity of juxtaposition and the absolute 
cohesion of the ekstatic for-itself, this temporality is composed 
o nows which have been, which remain at the place which 
as een assigned to them, but which influence each other 



TEMPORALITY 


237 


at a distance in their totality; it is this which renders it com- 
parable to the magic duration of Bergson’s philosophy. As 
soon as we enter on the plane of impure reflection — ^that is, 
of the reflection which seeks to determine the being which I 
am — an entire world appears which peoples this temporality. 
This world, a virtual presence, the probable object of my 
reflective intention, is the psychic world or the psyche. In one 
sense, its existence is purely ideal; in another it is, since it 
is-made-to-be, since it is revealed to consciousness. It is “my 
shadow”; it is what is revealed to me when I wish to see 
myself. In addition, this phantom world exists as a real situa- 
tion of the for-itself, for it can be that in terms of which 
the for-itself determines itself to be what it has to be. For 
example, I shall not go to this or that person’s house “because 
of” the antipathy which I feel toward him. Or I decide on 
this or that action by taking into consideration my hate or my 
love. Or I refuse to discuss politics because I know my quick 
temper and I can not risk becoming irritated. Along with 
that transcendent world which is lodged in the infinite 
becoming of pre-historic indifference there is constituted 
precisely 'as a virtual unity of being that temporality which is 
called “inner” or “qualitative,” which is the objectivation in 
in-itself of original temporality. In this inner temporality we 
find the first outline of an “outside”; the for-itself sees itself 
almost as bestowing an outside on its own eyes, but this 
outside is purely virtual. We shall see later how being-for- 
others realizes the suggestion of this “outside.” 



CHAPTER THREE 


Transcendence 


In order to arrive at as complete a description as possible 
of the for-itself we chose as a guiding thread the exami- 
nation of negative attitudes. As we have seen, all questions 
which we can pose and the replies which can be made, to 
them are conditioned by the permanent possibility of non- 
being, outside us and vdthin. Our original goal, however, 
was not only to discover the negative structures of the for- 
itself. In the Introduction we encountered a problem, and it 
is this problem which we have wished to resolve: what is 
the original relation of human reality to the being of phenom- 
ena or being-in-itself? In the Introduction indeed we were 
obliged to reject both the realist solution and the idealist 
solution. It appeared to us both that transcendent being could 
not act on consciousness and that consciousness could not 
construct the transcendent by objectivizing elements . bor- 
rowed from its subjectivity. Consequently we concluded that 
^ e original relation to being could not be an external rela- 
unite two substances originally isolated, 
e Relation of the ^ regions of being is a primitive up- 
^rge, we said, “and it forms a part of the very structure of 
ese emgs. The concrete is revealed to us as the synthetic 
totality of which consciousness, like the phenomenon, con- 
stitutes only the articulations. 


238 



TRANSCENDENCE 


239 


But although in one sense consciousness considered in iso- 
lation is an abstraction, and although phenomena — even the 
phenomenon of being — are similarly abstract in so far as 
they cannot exist as phenomena without appearing to a con- 
sciousness, nevertheless the being of phenomena as in an in- 
itself which is what it is can not be considered as an abstrac- 
tion. In order to be, it needs only itself; it refers only to it- 
self. On the other hand, our description of the for-itself has 
shown us how this, on the contrary, is removed as far as pos- 
sible fropi a substance and from the in-itself; we have seen 
that it is its own nothingness and that it can exist only in 
the ontological unity of its ekstases. Therefore while the re- 
lation of the for-itself to the in-itself is originally constitutive 
of the very being which is put into the relation, we should not 
understand that this relation is constitutive of the in-itself but 
rather of the for-itself. It is in the for-itself alone that we 
must look for the key to that relation to being which we 
call, for example, knovdng. The for-itself is responsible in 
its being for its relation with the in-itself, or if you prefer, 
it produces itself originally on the foundation of a relation 
to the in-itself. This is what we already anticipated when we 
defined consciousness as “a being such that in its being, 
its being is in question in so far as this being implies a 
being other than itself.” But since formulating this defini- 
tion we have acquired new knowledge. In particular we have 
grasped the profound meaning of the for-itself as the foun- 
dation of its own nothingness. Is it not time now to utilize 
this knowledge to determine and explain that ekstatic rela- 
tion of the for-itself to the in-itself on the foundation of 
which knowing and acting in general can appear? Are we 
not in a position now to reply to our origin^ question? In 
order to be non-thetic self-consciousness, consciousness must 
be a thetic consciousness of something, as we have noted. 
But what we have studied hitherto is the for-itself as the 
original mode of being of non-thetic self-consciousness. Are 
we not therefore bound to describe the relations of the for- 
itself with the in-itself inasmuch as these are constitutive of 
the very being of the for-itself? Are we not able at present 
to find the answer to questions of the following type: Since 
the in-itself is what it is, how and why does the being of 
the for-itself have to be a knowledge of the in-itself? And 
what in general is knowledge? 



240 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


I. KNOWLEDGE AS A TYPE OF RELATION 
BETWEEN THE FOR-ITSELF AND THE 

IN-rrSELF ' 

There is only intuitive knowledge. Deduction and discur- 
sive argument, incorrectly called examples of knowing, are 
only instruments which lead to intuition. When intuition 
is reached, methods utilized to attain it are effaced before 
it; in cases where it is not attained, reason and argument 
remain as indicating signs which point toward an intuition 
beyond reach; finally if it has been attained but is not a 
present mode of my consciousness, the precepts which I use 
remain as the results of operations formerly effected, like 
what Descartes called the “memories of ideas.” If someone 
asks for a definition of intuition, Husserl will reply, in agree- 
ment with the majority of philosophers, that it is the pres- 
ence of the thing {Sache) “in person” to consciousness. 
Knowledge therefore is of the type of being which we de- 
scribed in the preceding chapter under the title of “presence 

to But we have established that the in-itself can 

never ^ by itself be presence. Being-present, in fact, is an 
ekstatic mode of being of the for-itself. We are then com- 
pelled to reverse the terms of our definition: intuition is the 
presence of consciousness to the thing. Therefore we must 
return now to the problem of the nature and the meaning 
of this presence of the for-itself to being. 

In the Introduetion while using the still not elucidated 
concept of consciousness,” we established the necessity for 
consciousness to be consciousness of something. In fact it is 
by means of &at of which it is conscious that consciousness 
distinguishes itself in its own eyes and that it can be self" 
consciousness; a wnsciousness which would not be conscious- 
ness (of) something would be consciousness (of) nothing. But 
at present we have elucidated the ontological meaning of con- 
sciousness or the for-itself. We can therefore pose the prob- 
em m more precise terms and ask: What do we mean when 
we say that it is necessary for consciousness to-be-conscious- 
ness of something — considered on the ontological level; i.e., 
in the perspective of being-for-itself? 

We know that the for-itself is the foundation of its own 
no gness m the form of the phantom dyad — ^the reflec- 
lon re ectmg. The reflecting exists only in order to re- 



TRANSCENDENCE 


241 


fleet the reflection, and the reflection is a reflection only in 
so far as it refers to the reflecting. Thus the two terms out- 
lined in the dyad point to each other, and each engages its 
being in the being of the other. But if the reflecting is 
nothing other than the reflecting of this reflection, and if 
the reflection can be characterized only by its “being-in- 
order-to-be-reflected in this reflecting,” then the two terms 
of the quasi-dyad support their two nothingnesses on each 
other, conjointly annihilating themselves. It is necessary 
that the reflecting reflect something in order that the en- 
semble should not dissolve into nothing. But if the reflec- 
tion, on the other hand, were something, independent of 
its being-in-order-to-be-reflected, then it would necessar- 
ily be qualified not as a reflection but as an in-itself. This 
would be to introduce opacity into the system “reflec- 
tion-reflecting” and, even more, to complete the suggested 
scissiparity. For in the for-itself the reflection is also the 
reflecting. But if the reflection is qualified, it is separated 
from the reflecting and its appearance is separated from 
its reality; the cogito becomes impossible. The reflection 
can be simultaneously “something to be reflected” and noth- 
ing, but only if it makes itself qualified by something 
other than itself or, if you prefer, if it is reflected as a re- 
lation to an outside which it is not. 

What defines the reflection for the reflecting is always 
that to -which it is presence. Even a joy, apprehended on 
the unreflective level, is only the “reflected” presence to 
a laughing and open world full of happy perspectives. 
But the few preceding comments have already informed us 
that non-being is an essential structure of presence. Pres- 
ence encloses a radical negation as presence to that which 
one is not. What is present to me is what is not me. We 
should note furthermore that this “non-being” is implied 
a priori in every theory of knowledge. It is impossible 
to construct the notion of an object if we do not have orig- 
inally a negative relation designating the object as that 
which is not consciousness. This is what made it quite easy 
to use the expression “non-ego,” which was the fashion 
for a time, although one could not detect on the part of 
those who employed it the slightest concern to found this 
“not” which originally qualified the external world. Actu- 
ally neither the connection of -jepresentation, nor the nec- 
essity of certain subjective ensembles, nor temporal irrevers- 



242 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


ibility, nor an appeal to infinity could serve to constitute 
the object as such (that is, to serve as foundation for a 
further negation which would separate out the non-ego and 
oppose it to me as such) if this negation were not given 
first and if it were' not the a priori foundation of all ex- 
perience. 

The thing, before all comparison, before all construction, 
is that which is present to consciousness as not being con- 
sciousness. The original relation of presence as tlic founda- 
tion of knowledge is negath'e. But as negation comes to the 
world by means of tlic for-itsclf, and as the thing is what 
it is in tlie absolute indifference of identity, it can not 
be tlie thing which is posited as not being the for-itself. 
Negation comes from the for-itsclf. We should not con- 
ceive this negation as a type of judgment which would bear 
on the thing itself and deny concerning it that it is the 
for-itself; this type of negation could be conceived only if 
the for-itself were a substance already fully formed, and 
even in that case it could emanate only ns a third being 
establishing from outside a negative relation between two 
beings. But by the original negation the for-itself con- 
stitutes itself as not being the thing. Consequently the defini- 
tion of consciousness which we gave earlier can be formu- 
lated in ffie perspective of the for-itsclf as follows: “The 
for-itself is a being such that in its being, its being is in 
question in so far as this being is essentially a certain way 

not being a being which it posits simultaneously as other 
than itself.” ^ 


^ Knowledge appears then as a mode of being. Knowing 
IS neither a relation established after the event between 
o beings, nor is it an activity of one of these two beings, 
nor is It a quality of a property or a virtue. It is Uie very 

emg o the for-itself in so far as this is presence to ; 

toat IS, m so far as the for-itsclf has to be its being by 

pnt Tu- ^ ^ ^ certain being to which it is pres- 

means that the for-itself can be only in the mode 

causing itself to be reflected as not 

i^ tLVn f !! “something” which must qual- 

m order that the dyad “reflection-reflecting” 

flecL? °°^^“eooss is pure negation. The re- 

beintr nc ^ J^o be^ qualified outside next to a certain 

bv ‘Ho i^eing. This is precisely what we mean 

by to be consciousness of something.” 


TRANSCENDENCE 


243 


But we must define more precisely what we understand 
by this original negation. Actually we should distinguish 
two types of negation: external negation and internal ne- 
gation. The first appears as a purely external bond estab- 
lished between two beings by a witness. When I say, for 
example, “A cup is not an inkwell,” it is very evident that 
the foundation of this negation is neither in the cup nor 
in the inkwell.^ Both of these objects are what they are, 
and that is all. The negation stands as a categorical and 
ideal connection which I establish between them without 
modifying them in any way whatsoever, without enrich- 
ing them or impoverishing them with the slightest quality; 
they are not even ever so slightly grazed by this negative syn- 
thesis. As it serves neither to enrich them nor to consti- 
tute them, it remains strictly external. But we can already 
guess the meaning of the other type of negation if we 
consider such expressions as “I am not rich” or “I am not 
handsome.” Pronounced with a certain melancholy, they do 
not mean only that the speaker is denied a certain quality 
but that the denial itself comes to influence the inner 
structure of the positive being who has been denied the 
quality. When I say, *T am not handsome,” I do not limit 
myself to denying, with respect to myself taken as wholly 
concrete, a certain virtue which due to this fact passes in- 
to nothingness while I keep intact the positive totality of 
my being (as when I say, “The vase is not white, it is 
gray” — “The inkwell is not on the table, it is on the man- 
telpiece”). I intend to indicate that “not being handsome” 
is a certain negative virtue of my being. It characterizes 
me within; as negative it is a real quality of myself — 
that of not being handsome — and this negative quality 
wUl explain my melancholy as well as, for example, my 
failures in the world. 

By an internal negation we understand such a relation 
between two beings that the one which is denied to the 
other qualifies the other at the heart of its essence — by 
absence. The negation becomes then a bond of essentid 
being since at least one of the beings on which it depends 
IS such that it points toward the other, that it carries the 
other in its heart as an absence. Nevertheless it is clear 

*Tr. Sartre’s text reads “the foundation of this negation is neither in 
the table nor in the inkwell.” The “table” is surely an error. 



244 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


that this type of negation can not be applied to being-in- 
itself. By nature it belongs to the for-itself. Only the for- 
itself can be determined in its being by a being which it is 
not. And if the internal negation can appear in the world — 
as when we say of a pearl that it is false, of a fruit that 
it is not ripe, of an egg that it is not fresh, etc . — ^it is by 
the for-itself that it comes into the world — like negation in 
general. Knowing belongs to the for-itself alone, for the 
reason that only the for-itself can appear to itself as not being 
what it knows. And as here appearance and being are one — 
since the for-itself has to be its appearance — we must con- 
clude that the for-itself includes within its being the being of 
the object which it is not inasmuch as the for-itself puts its 
own being into question as not being the being of the object 
Here we must rid ourselves of an illusion which may be 
formulated as follows: in order to constitute myself as not 
being a particular being, I must have ahead of time in some 
manner or other a knowledge of this being; for I can not judge 
the differences between myself and a being of which I know 
nothing. It is true, of course, that in our empirical existence 
we can not know how we differ from a Japanese or an English- 
man, from a worker or an employer until we have some notion 
of these different beings. But these empirical distinctions can 
not serve as a basis for us here, for we are undertaking the 
study of an ontological relation which must render all ex- 
perience possible and which aims at establishing how in gen- 
eral an object can exist for consciousness. It is not possible 
then for me to have any experience of an object as an 
object which is not me until I constitute it is as an object. 
On the contrary, what makes all ejqjerience possible is an fl 
priori upsurge of the object for the subject — or since the 
upsurge is the original fact of the for-itself, an original up- 
surge of the for-itself as presence to the object which it is 
not. What we should do then is to invert the terms of the pre- 
ceding formula and formulate it thus: the fundamental relation 
by which the for-itself has to be as not being this particular 
object to which it is present is the foundation of all knowl- 
e ge of this being. But we must describe this primary relation 
m(^ exactly if we want to make it understandable. 

remaining in the statement of the in- , 
* ^ illusion denounced in the preceding paragraph 

IS e o servation that I can not determine myself not to be 



TRANSCENDENCE 


245 


an object which is originally severed from all connection with 
me. I can not deny that I am a particular being if I am a? a 
distance from that being. K I conceive of a being entirely 
closed in on itself, this being in itself will be solely that which 
it is, and due to this fact there will be no room in it for 
either negation or knowledge. It is in fact in terms of the 
being which it is not that a being can make known to itself 
what it is not. This means in the case of an internal nega- 
tion that it is within and upon the being which it is not that 
the for-itself appears as not being what it is not. In this sense 
the internal negation is a concrete ontological bond. We are 
not dealing here with one of those empirical negations in 
which the qualities denied are distinguished first by their 
absence or even by their non-being. In the internal negation 
the for-itself collapses on what it denies. The qualities denied 
are -precisely those to which the for-itself is most present; it. 
is from them that it derives its negative force and perpetually 
renews it. In this sense it is necessary to see the denied qualities 
as a constitutive factor of the being of the for-itself, for the 
for-itself must be there outside itself upon them; it must be 
they in order to deny that it is they. In short the term-of- 
brigin of the internal negation is the in-itself, the thing which 
is there, and outside of it there is nothing except an emptiness, 
a nothingness which is distinguished from the thing only by 
a pure negation for which this thing furnishes the very content. 
The difiSculty encountered by materialism in deriving knowl- 
edge from the object stems from the fact that materialism 
wants to produce a substance in terms of another substance. 
But this dfficulty can not hinder us, for we aflarm that 
there is nothing outside the in-itself except a reflection (re- 
flst) of that nothing which is itself polarized and defined by 
the in-itself inasmuch as it is precisely the nothingness of 
this in-itself, the individualized nothing which is nothing 
only because it is not the in-itself. Thus in this ekstatic relation 
which is constitutive of the internal negation and of knowl- 
edge, it is the in-itself “in person” which is the concrete pole 
in its plenitude, and the for-itself is nothing other than the 
emptiness in which the in-itself is detached. 

^ The for-itself is outside itself in the in-itself since it causes 
to be defined by what it is not; the first bond between 
&e in-itself and the -for-itself is therefore a bond of being. 
But this bond is neither a lack nor an absence. In the case 
of absence indeed I make myself determined by a being which 



246 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


I am not and which does not exist or which is not there; that 
is, what determines me is like a hollow in the middle of what 
I shall call my empirical plenitude. On the other hand, in 
knowledge, taken as a bond of ontological being, the being 
which I am not represents the absolute plenitude of the in- 
itself. And I, on the contrary, am the nothingness, the ab- 
sence which determines itself in existence from the stand- 
point of this fullness. This means that in that type of being 
which we call knowing, the only being which can be en- 
countered and which is perpetually there is the known. The 
knower is not; he is not apprehensible. He is nothing other 
than that which brings it about that there is a being-there on 
the part of the known, a presence — ^for by itself the known 
is neither present nor absent, it simply is. But this presence 
of the known is presence to nothing, since the knower is the 
pure reflection of a non-being; the presence appears then 
across the total translucency of the knower known, an abso- 
lute presence. 

A psychological and empirical exemplification of this 
original relation is furnished us in the case of fascination. 
In fascination, which represents the immediate fact of know- 
ing, the knower is absolutely nothing but a pure negation; 
he does not find or recover himself anywhere — ^he is not. The 
only qualification which he can support is that he is not pre- 
cisely this particular fascinating object. In fascination there 
is nothing more than a gigantic object in a desert world. Yet 
the fascinated intuition is in no way a fusion with the object. 
In fact the condition necessary for the existence of fascination 
is that the object be raised in absolute relief on a background 
of emptiness; that is, I am precisely the immediate negatioU'- 
of the object and nothing but that 

We find this same pure negation at the basis of those pan- 
theistic intuitions which Rousseau has several times described 
^ concrete psychic events in his history. He claims that on 
those occasions he melted into the universe, that the world 
alone was suddenly found present as an absolute presence and 
unconditioned totality. And certainly we can understand this 
total, isolated presence of the world, its pure “being-there”; 
certainly we admit freely that at this privileged moment there 
was nothing else but the world. But this does not mean, as 

ousseau claims, that there was a fusion of consciousness 
world Such a fusion would signify the solidification 
e or-itself in in-itself, and at the same stroke, the dis- 



TRANSCENDENCE 


247 


appearance of the world and of the in-itself as presence. It is 
true that in the pantheistic intention there is no longer any- 
thing but the world — save for that which causes the in-itself 
to be present as the world; that is, a pure negation which 
is a non-thetic self-consciousness as negation. Precisely because 
knowledge is not absence but presence, there is nothing which 
separates the knower from the known. 

Intuition has often been defined as the immediate presence 
of the known to the knower, but it is seldom that anyone 
has reflected on the requirements of the notion of the im- 
mediate, Immediacy is the absence of any mediator; that is 
obvious, for otherwise the mediator alone would be known 
and not what is mediated. But if we can not posit any inter- 
mediary, we must at the same time reject both continuity and 
discontinuity as a type of presence of the knower to the 
known. In fact we shall not admit that there is any continuity 
of the knower with the known, for it supposes an intermediary 
term which would be at once knower and known, which sup- 
presses the autonomy of the knower in the face of the 
known while engaging the being of the knower in the being of 
the known. Then the structure of the object disappears since 
the object must be absolutely denied by the for-itself as the 
being of the for-itself. But neither can we consider the 
original relation of the for-itself to the in-itself as a relation 
of discontinuity. To be sure, the separation between two 
discontinuous elements is an emptiness — i.e., a nothing — ^but 
it is a realized nothing — i.e., in-itself. This substantialized 
nothing is as such a non-conductive density; it destroys the 
immediacy of presence, for it has qua nothing become some- 
thing. The presence of the for-itself to the ha-itself can be 
expressed neither in terms of continuity nor in terms of dis- 
continuity, for it is pure denied identity. 

To make this clearer, let us employ a comparison. When 
two curves are tangential to one another, they offer a type 
of presence without intermediaries. Nevertheless the eye 
grasps only a single line for the length of their tangency. 
Moreover if the two curves were hidden so that one could 
see only the length A B where they are tangential to each 
other, it would be impossible to distinguish them. Actually 
what separates them is nothing; there is neither continuity nor _ 
discontinuity but pure identity. Now suddenly uncover the 
two figures and we apprehend them once again as being two 
throughout all their length. This situation derives not from an 



248 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


abrupt factual separation which would suddenly be realized 
between them but from the fact that the two movements 
by which we draw the two curves so as to perceive them in- 
clude each one a negation as a constituting act. Thus what 
separates the two curves at the very spot of their tangency 
is nothing, not even a distance; it is a pure negativity as the 
counterpart of a constituting synthesis. Such an image will 
enable us to understand better the relation of immediacy which 
originally unites tlie knower to the known. 

Ordinarily indeed it happens that a negation depends on 
a “something” which exists before the negation and consti- 
tutes its matter. For example, if I say that the inkwell is not 
the table, then table and inkwell are objects already consti- 
tuted whose being in-itself will be the support of the nega- 
tive judgment. But in the case of the relation “knower- 
known,” there is nothing on the side of the knower which 
can provide a support for the negation; no difference, no 
principle of distinction “is there” to separate in-itself the 
knower from the known. But in the total indistinction of 
being, there is nothing but a negation which does not even 
exist but which has to be, which does not even posit itself 
as a negation. Consequently knowledge and finally the know- 
er himself are nothing except the fact “that there is” being, 
that being in-itself gives itself and raises itself in relief on 
the ground of this nothing. In this sense we can call knowl- 
edge the pure solitude of the known. It is enough to say 
that the original phenomenon of knowledge adds nothing 
to being and creates nothing. It does not enrich being, for 
knowledge is pure negativity. It only brings it about that 
there is being. But this fact “that there is” being is not an 
inner^ determination of being — which is what it is — but of 
negativity. In this sense every revelation of a positive char- 
acteristic of being is the counterpart of an ontological deter- 
mination as pure negativity in the being of the for-itself. 

For example, as we shall see later, the revelation of the 
spatiality of being is one with the non-positional apprehension 
by the for-itself of itself as unextended. And the unextended 
character of the for-itself is not a positive, mysterious 
virtue of spirituality which is hiding under a negative 
denomination; it is a natural ekstatic relation, for it is 
by and in the extension of the transcendent in-itself that 

e or-itself makes itself known to itself and realizes its own 
non-extension. The for-itself can not be first uhextended in 



TRANSCENDENCE 


249 


order later to enter into relation with an extended being, for 
no matter how we consider it, the concept of the unextended 
makes no sense by itself; it is nothing but the negation of 
the extended. If we could suppress — ^to imagine an impos- 
sibility — ^the extension of the revealed determinations of the 
in-itself, then the for-itself would remain aspatial; it would 
be neither extended nor unextended, and it could not pos- 
sibly be characterized in any way whatsoever so far as ex- 
tension is concerned. In this sense extension is a transcen- 
dent determination which the for-itself has to apprehend 
to the exact degree that it denies itself as extended. That is 
why the term which seems best to indicate this inner rela- 
tion between knowing and being is the word realize, which 
we used earlier in its double ontological and gnostic mean- 
ing. I realize a project in so far as I give it being, but I also 
realize my situation in so far as 1 live it and make it be with 
my being. I “realize” the scope of a catastrophe, the difii- 
cidty of an undertaking. To know is to realize in both senses 
of the term. It is to cause being “to be there” while having 
to be the reflected negation of this being. The real is realiza- 
tion, We shall define transcendence as that inner and 
realizing negation which reveals the in-itself while deter- 
mining the being of the for-itself. 


n. DETERMINATION AS NEGATION 

To what being is the for-itself presence? Let us note imme- - 
diately that the question is badly phrased. Being is what it 
is; it can not possess in itself the determination “this one” 
to answer the question “which?” In short the question has 
meaning only if it is posited in a world. Consequently the 
for-itself can not be present to this being rather than to 
that since it is the presence of the for-itself which causes 
the existence of a “this” rather than a “that.” Our exam- 
ples, however, have shown us a for-itself denying concrete- 
ly that it is a particular being. This situation arises from the 
fact that we described the relation of knowledge before 
bringing to light its structure of negativity. In this sense, 
by the very fact that it was revealed in examples, that nega- 
tivity was already secondary. Negativity as original tran- 
scendence is not determined m terms of a this; it causes a 
this to exist. 



250 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


The original presence of the for-itself is presence to be- 
ing. Shall we say then that it is presence to all being? That 
would be to fall back into our former error. For totality can 
come to being only by the for-itself. A totality indeed sup- 
poses an internal relation of being between the terms of a 
quasi-multiplicity in the same way that a multiplicity sup- 
poses — in order to be this multiplicity — an inner totalizing 
relation among its elements. In this sense addition itself is a 
synthetic act. Totality can come to beings only by a being 
which has to be its own totality in their presence. This is 
precisely the case with the for-itself, a detotalized totality 
which temporalizes itself in a perpetual incompleteness. It 
is the for-itself in its presence to being which causes there 
to be an all of being. We must understand indeed that this 
partieular being can be called this only on the ground of the 
presence of all being. That does not mean that one being 
needs all being in order to exist but that the for-itself realiz- 
es itself as a realizing presence to this being on the original 
ground of a realizing presence to all. But conversely smce 
totality is an internal ontological relation of “thises,” it can 
be revealed only in and through the individual “thises.” 
That means that the for-itself as a realizing presence to all 
being realizes itself as a realizing presence to the “thises,” 
and as a realizing presence to the “thises” it realizes itself 
as a realizing presence to all being. In other words, the pres- 
ence of the for-itself to the world can be realized only by 
its presence to one or several particular things, and converse- 
ly its presence to a particular thing can be realized only on 
the ground of a presence to the world. Perception is articu- 
lated only on the ontological foundation of presence to the 
world, and the world is revealed concretely as the ground of 
each individual perception. It remains to explain how the 
upsurge of the for-itself in being can bring it about that 
there is an all and “thises.” 

The presence of the for-itself to being as totality comes 
from the fact that the for-itself has to be — ^in the mode of 
being what it is not and of not being what it is — its own 
totality as a detotalized totality. In so far as the for-itself 
makes itself be in the unity of a single upsurge as all which 
is not being, being stands before it as 'all which the for- 
itself is not. The original negation, in fact, is a radical ne- 
gation. T^e for-itself, which stands before being as its own 
totality, is itself the whole of the negation and hence is the 



TRANSCENDENCE 


251 


negation of the whole. Thus the achieved totality of the 
world is revealed as constitutive of the being of the un- 
achieved totality by which the being of totality comes into 
being. It is through the world that the for-itself makes it- 
self known to itself as a totality detotalized, which means 
that by its very^ upsurge the for-itself is a revelation of being 
as a totality inasmuch as the for-itself has to be its own to- 
tality in the detotalized mode. Thus the very meaning of 
the for-itself is outside in being, but it is through the for- 
itself that the meaning of being appears. This totalization 
of being adds nothing to being; it is nothing but the man- 
ner in which being is revealed as not being the for-itself, 
the manner in which there is being. It appears outside the 
for-itself, beyond all reach, as that which determines the 
for-itself in its being. But the fact of revealing being as a 
totality does not touch being any more than the fact of 
counting two cups on the table touches the existence or na- 
ture of either of them. Yet it is not a purely subjective mod- 
ification of the for-itself since it causes all subjectivity to be 
possible. But if the for-itself is to be the nothingness where- 
by “there is” being, then being can exist originally only as 
totality. Thus knowledge is the world. To use Heidegger’s 
expression, the world and outside of that — nothing. But 
this “nothing” is not originally that in which human re- 
ality emerges. This nothing is human reality itself as the 
radical negation by means of which the world is revealed. 
Of course the very apprehension of the world as totality 
causes the appearance alongside the world of a nothingness 
which sustains and encompasses this totality. In fact this 
nothingness as the absolute nothing which is left outside 
the totality even determines the totality. This is why the 
totalization adds nothing to being, for it is only the result 
of the appearance of nothingness as the limit of being. But 
this nothingness is not anything except human reality ap- 
prehending itself as excluded from being and perpetually 
beyond being, in commerce with nothing. It amounts to the 
same thing whether we say, human reality is that by which 
heing is revealed as totality — or, human reality is that which 
causes there to be nothing outside of being. This nothing 
IS the possibility for there to be a beyond-the-world such 
fhat (1) this possibility reveals being as a world and (2) 
human reality has to be this possibility. As such, this noth- 



252 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


ing constitutes — along with the original presence to being — 
the circuit of selfness. 

But human reality makes itself the unachieved totality of 
negations only in so far as it reaches beyond a concrete ne- 
gation which it has to be as actual presence to being. If it 
were in fact a pure consciousness (of) being a syncretic and 
undifferentiated negation, it could not determine itself and 
therefore could not be a concrete totality, although detotal- 
ized, of its determinations. It is a totality only to the extent 
that through all its other negations it escapes the concrete 
negation which it is at present. Its being can be its own 
totality only to the extent that it is a surpassing toward the 
whole which it has to be, beyond the partial structure which 
it is. Otherwise it would simply be what it is and could in 
no way be considered as either a totality or a non-totality. 
In the sense then that a partial negative structure must ap- 
pear on the ground of the undifferentiated negations which 
I am-— and of which it forms a part — ^I make known to my- 
self by means of being-in-itself a certain concrete reality 
which I have to not-be. The “this” is the being which I at 
present am not, in so far as it appears on the ground of 
the totality of being. This is what I at present am not inas- 
much as I have to be nothing of being: it is what is re- 
vealed on the undifferentiated ground of being, to make 
imown to me the concrete negation which I have to be on 
the totalizing ground of my negations. 

This original relation between the all and the “this” is at 
s^rce of the relation between figure and ground which 
me Gestalt theory” has brought to light. The “this” always 
appears on a ground; that is, on the undifferentiated totality 
of bemg inasmuch as the For-itself is the radical and syn- 

thfo ^ always dissolve again into 

tos undifferentiated totality when anotoer “this” arises. 

trrnnnrf of the “this” or of the figure on the 

own rn Correlate of the appearance of my 

syncretic ground of a radical 

eatinn nr ^ ^ 

beinp-” I am it in toe mode of “non- 

deed onlv in tV ^ ^ mode of being. It is in- 

on me CToiinri present negation will appear 

wL indS it is. omer- 

or else it wonlrJ negation would be entirely cut off 

else It would be dissolved in toe radical negation. The 


TRANSCENDENCE 


253 


appearance of the this on the all is correlative with a cer- 
tain way which the For-itself has of being the negation of 
itself. There is a this because I am not yet my future nega- 
tions and because I am no longer my past negations. The 
revelation of the this supposes that the “accent is put” on 
a certain negation accompanied by the withdrawal of the 
others in the syncretic disappearance into the ground; that 
is, that the for-itself can exist only as a negation which is 
constituted on the withdrawal into totality of the radical 
negativity. The For-itself is not the world, spatiality, perma- 
nence, matter, in short the in-itself in general, but its man- 
ner of not-being-them is to have to not-be this table, this 
glass, this room on the total ground of negativity. The this 
supposes then a negation of the negation — but a negation 
which has to be the radical negation which it denies, which 
does not cease reattaching itself to it by an ontological thread, 
and which remains ready to dissolve in the radical negation 
at the upsurge of another “this.” In this sense the “this” is 
revealed as “this” by “a withdrawal into the ground of the 
world” on -the part of all the other “thises”; its determina- 
tion, which is the origin of all determinations, is a nega- 
tion. 

We must understand that this negation — seen from the 
point of view of the “this” — ^is wholly ideal. It adds noth- 
ing to being and subtracts nothing from it. The being con- 
fronted as “this” is what it is and does not cease being it; 
It does not become. As such it can not be outside of itself 
in the whole as a structure of the whole, nor can it be out- 
side of itself in the whole so as to deny its identity with 
the whole. Negation can come to the this only through a 
being which has to be simultaneously presence to the whole 
of being and to the this — that is, through an ekstatic being. 
Since it leaves the this intact as being in itself, since it does 
not effect a real synthesis of all the thises in totality, the 
negation constitutive of the this is a negation of the external 
type; the relation of the “this” to the whole is a relation of 
externality. Thus we see that determination appears as an 
external negation correlative with the radical and ekstatic in- 
ternal negation which I am. This is the explanation of the 
ambiguous character of the world, which is revealed simul- 
taneously as a synthetic totality and as a purely additive col- 
lection of all the “thises.” In so far as the world is a totality 
which is revealed as that on which the For-itself has to be 



254 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


radically its own nothingness, the world is presented as a 
syncretism of undifferentiation. But in so far as this radical 
nihilation is always beyond a concrete and present nihila- 
tion, the world appears always ready to open like a box to 
allow the appearance of one or several “thises” which al- 
ready were (there in the heart of the undifferentiation of 


the ground) what they are now as a differentiated figure. 
When we are gradually approaching a landscape which was 
given in great masses, we see objects appear which are given 
as having been there already, as elements in a discontinuous 
collection of “thises”; in the same way, in the ‘ experiments 
of the Gestalt school, the continuous background suddenly 
when apprehended as figure bursts into a multiplicity of 
discontinuous elements. Thus the world, as the correlate of 
a detotalized totality, appears as an evanescent totality in 
the sense that it is never a real synthesis but an ideal limita- 
tion — by nothing — of a collection of thises. 

Thus the continuous as a formal quality of the ground 
allows the discontinuous to appear as a type of external re- 
lation between the this and the totality. It is precisely this 
perpetual evanescence of the totality into collection, of the 
continuous into the discontinuous that defines space. Space 
can not be a being. It is a moving relation between beings 
which are unrelated. It is the total independence of the in- 
itselfs, as it is revealed to a being which is presence to “all” 
the in-itself as the independence of each one in relation to 
the others. It is the unique way in which beings can be 
revealed as having no relation, can be thus revealed to the 
being through which relation comes into the world; that is, 


space IS pure exteriority. Since this exteriority cannot belong 
to any one of the thises considered and since in addition a 
purely local negativity is self-destructive, it can neither be 
y Itself nor be made-to-be.” The spatializing being is the 
Bor-itself as co-present to the whole and to the “this.” Space 
if ^.4 world, but it is the instability of the world appre- 
hended as totality, inasmuch.^ as the world can always disin- 
tegrate into external multiplicity. Space is neither the ground 
nor e gure but the ideality of the ground inasmuch as it 
an a ways d^inte^ate into figures; it is neither the con- 
discontuiuous, but the permanent passage - 
• muous to discontinuous. The existence of space 

^ by causing being “to be there” 

ing to being. Space is the ideality of the synthe- 


TRANSCENDENCE 


255 


sis. In this sense it is at once totality to the extent that it 
derives its origin from the world, and at the same time 
nothing inasmuch as it results in the pullulation of the 
thises. Space does not allow itself to be apprehended by 
concrete intuition for it is not, but it is continuously spa- 
tialized. It depends on temporality and appears in tempo- 
rality since it can come into the world only through a being 
whose mode of being is temporalization; for space is the 
way in which this being loses itself ekstatically in order to 
realize being. The spatial characteristic of the this is not 
added synthetically io the this but is only the “place” of the 
this; that is, its relation of exteriority to the ground inas- 
much as this relation can collapse into a multiplicity of ex- 
ternal relations with other thises when the ground itself 
disintegrates into a multiplicity of figures. In this sense it 
would be useless to conceive of space as a form imposed on 
phenomena by the a priori structure of our sensibility. 
Space can not be a form, for it is nothing; it is, on the con- 
trary, the indication that nothing except the negation — and 
this still as a type of external relation which leaves intact 
what it unites — can come to the in-itself through the For- 
itself. As for the For-itself, if it is not space, this is because 
it apprehends itself precisely as not being being-in-itself in 
so far as the in-itself is revealed to it in the mode of exteri- 
ority which we call extension. It is precisely by denying 
exteriority in itself and apprehending itself as ekstatic that 
the For-itself spatializes space. The relation between the For- 
itself and the in-itself is not one of juxtaposition or indif- 
ferent exteriority. Its relation with the in-itself, which is the 
foundation of all relations, is the internal negation, and it is 
through this that being-in-itself continues in indifferent ex- 
teriority in relation to other beings existing in a world. When 
the exteriority of indifference is hypostasized as a substance 
existing in and through itself — which can be effected only 
at a lower stage of knowledge — it is made the object of a 
type of particular study under the title of geometry and be- 
comes a pure specification of the abstract theory of multi- 
plicities. 

It remains to determine what type of being the external 
negation possesses since this comes to the world by the For- 
itself. We know that it does not belong to the this. This 
newspaper does not deny concerning itself that it is the 
table on which it is lying; for in that case the -newspaper 



256 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


would be ekstatically outside itself and in the table which 
it denies, and its relation to the table would be an internal 
negation; it would thereby cease even to be in-itself and 
would become for-itself. The determinative relation of the 
this therefore can belong neither to the this nor to the that’, 
it enfolds them without touching them, without conferring 
on them the slightest trace of new character; it leaves them 
for what they are. In this sense we can modify the famous 
statement of Spinoza, "Omnis determinatio est negatio,” 
which Hegel declared to possess infinite riches; and we will 
claim rather that every determination which does not belong 
to the being which has to be its own determinations is an 
ideal negation. Moreover it would be inconceivable that it 
should be otherwise. Even if following an empirical-critical 
psychologism, we were to consider things as purely subjec- 
tive contents, we still could not conceive that the subject 
would realize internal synthetic negations among these con- 
tents without being them in a radical ekstatic immanence 
which would remove all hope of any passage to objectivity. 

With even more reason we can not imagine that the For- 
itself effects distorting synthetic negations among transcen- 
dents which it is not. In this sense the external negation 
constitutive of the “this” can not appear as an objective 
characteristic of the thing, if we understand by objective 
that which by nature belongs to the in-itself — or that which 
in one way or another really constitutes the object as it is. 
But we must not conclude from this that the external nega- 
tion has subjective existence like the pure mode of being of 
the For-itself. The type of existence of the For-itself is a 


pure internal negation; the existence in it of- an external 
negation- would be destructive of its very existence. Conse- 
quently the external negation can not be a way of disposing 
and of classifying phenomena which would exist only as 
subjective phantoms, nor can it “subjectiyize”- being in so 
far as its revelation is constitutive of the For-itself. Its very 
exteriority therefore requires that it remain “in the air,” ex- 
tenor to the For-itself as well as to the In-itself. On the 
other hand, precisely because it is exteriority, it can not be 
y Itself, It refuses all supports, it is by nature Unselbstdndig, 
and yet it can not be referred ^to any substance. It is a noth- 
ing. In fact it is because the inkwell is not the table — ^nor 

apprehend it as an ink- 
. And yet if I say, “The inkwell is not the table,” I am 



TRANSCENDENCE 


257 


thinking nothing. Thus determination is a nothing which 
does not belong as an internal structure either to the thing 
or to consciousness, but its being is to-be-summoned by the 
For-itseif , across a system of internal negations in which the 
in-itself is revealed in its indifference to all that is not itself. 
In so far as the For-itself makes itself known to itself by the 
In-itself, which it is not — in the mode of internal negation, 
the indifference of the In-itself as the indifference which the 
For-itself has to not-be is revealed in the world as determi- 
nation. 


m. QUALITY AND QUANTITY, 
POTENTIALITY, INSTRUMENTALITY 

Quality is nothing other than the being of the this when 
it is considered apart from all external relation with the 
world or with other thises. Too often quality has been con- 
ceived as a simple subjective determination, and its quality- 
of-being has then been confused with the subjectivity of the 
psychic. The problem has then appeared to be especially to 
explain the constitution of an object-pole conceived as the 
transcendent unity of qualities. We have shown that this 
problem is' insoluble. A quality does not objectivate itself if 
it is subjective. Supposing that we had projected the unity 
of an object-pole Beyond qualities, at most each one of them 
would be ^ven directly as the subjective effect of the action 
of things upon us. But the yellow of the lemon is not a sub- 
jective mode of apprehending the lemon; it is the lemon, 
■^d it is not true either that the object X appears as the 
empty form which holds together disparate qualities. In fact 
the lemon is extended throughout its qualities, and each of 
its qualities is extended throughout each of the others. It is 
the sourness of the lemon which is yellow, it is the yellow 
of the lemon which is sour. We eat the color of a cake, and 
the taste of this cake is the instrument which reveals its 
shape and its color to what we may call the alimentary in- 
tuition. Conversely if I poke my finger into a jar of jam, 
the sticky coldness of that jam is the revelation to my fin- 
gers of its sugary taste. The fluidity, the tepidity, the bluish 
^ior, the undulating restlessness of the water in a pool are 
given at one stroke, each quality through the others; and 
It IS this total interpenetration which we call the this. This 



258 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


fact has been clearly shown by the experiences of painters, 
especially of Cezanne, Husserl is wrong in believing that a 
synthetic necessity unconditionally unites color and form; 
it is the form which is color and light. If the painter wants 
to vary any one of these factors, the others change as well, 
not because they are linked by some sort of law but because 
at bottom they are one and the same being. 

In this sense every quality of being is all of being; the 
quality is the presence of the absolute contingency of being, 
its indifferent irreducibility. The apprehension of a quality 
does not add anything to being except the fact that being is 
there as this. In this sense a quality is not an external aspect 
of being, for being, since it has no “within,” can not have 
a “without.” But in order for there to be quality there must 
be being for a nothingness which by nature is ^ not being. 
Yet being is not in itself a quality although it is nothing 
either more or less. But quality is the whole of being re- 
vealing itself within the limits of the “there is.” It is not 
the outside’’ of being; it is all being since there cannot be 
being for being but only for that which makes itself not to 
be bemg. The relation of the For-itself to quality is an on- 
tological relation. The intuition of a quality is not the pas- 
sive contemplation of a given, and the mind is not an In- 
itself which remains what it is in that contemplation; that 
IS, which remains in the mode of indifference in relation to 

•f For-itself makes known to 

Itself what it is by means of quality. For the For-itself, to 

color of this notebook is to reflect on 
itself as the internal negation of that quality. That is, the 
apprehension of quality is not a “fulfillment” (Erfullung) 
as Husserl makes it, but the giving form, to an emptiness as 
a e ermmed emptiness of that quality. In this sense qual- 
ity^a presence perpetually out of reach. 

e description of knowledge is too often alimentary. 
®re s remains too much of prelogisme^ in episte- 
philosophy, and we are not yet rid of that primitive 
(which we must account for later) according to 
o know is to eat — ^that is, to ingest the known ob- 


the ^ ^ borrowed from a now discredited theory to 

not loEicat tn stage of human development, ' thought was 

-voiding contradic- 

de la vhllo'tnn-h- Lalande, Vocabulaire technique et critique 

philasoph.e. Pans: universitaires de France. 1951. pp. 814-815. 



TRANSCENDENCE 


259 


ject, to fill oneself with it {ErfUllung), and to digest it 
(“assimilation”) . We shall best account for the original phe- 
nomenon of perception by insisting on the fact that the re- 
lation of the quality to us is that of absolute proximity (it 
“is there,’* it haunts us) without either giving or refusing 
itself, but we must add that this proximity implies a dis- 
tance. If is what is immediately out of reach, what by defi- 
nition refers us to ourselves as to an emptiness. Contempla- 
tion of it can only increase our thirst for being as the sight 
of the food out of reach added to Tantalus’ hunger. Quality 
is the indication of what we are not and of the mode of 
being which is denied to us. The perception of white is the 
consciousness of the impossibility on principle for the For- 
itself to exist as color — that is, by being what it is. In this 
sense not only is being not distinguished from its qualities 
but even the whole apprehension of quality is the appre- 
hension of a this. Quality, whatever it may be, is revealed 
to us as a being. The odor which I suddenly breathe in with 
my eyes closed, even before I have referred it to an odorous 
object, is already an odor-being and not a subjective impres- 
sion. The light which strikes my eyes in the morning through 
my closed eyelids is already a light-being. This will appear 
obvious if one reflects on the fact that quality is. As a being 
which is what it is, it can indeed appear to a subjectivity, 
but it can not be inserted in the woof of that subjectivity 
which is what it is not and which is not what it is. To say 
that a quality is a quality-being is not to endow it with a 
mysterious support analogous to substance; it is simply to 
observe that its mode of being is radically different from 
the mode of the being “for-itself.” The being of whiteness 
or of sourness indeed could in no way be apprehended as 
ekstatic. 


If someone should ask now how it happens that the “this” 
bas qualities we should reply that actually the this is released 
as a totality on the ground of the world and that it is given 
as an undifferentiated unity. It is the for-itself which can 
deny itself from various points of view when confronting 
tbe this and which reveals the quality as a new this on the 


ground of the thing. For each negating act by which the 
freedom of the For-itself spontaneously constitutes its being, 
there is a corresponding total revelation of being “in pro- 
me.” This profile is nothing but a relation of the thing to 
the For-itself, a relation realized by the For-itself. It is the 



260 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

absolute determination of negativity, for it is not enou^ 
that the for-itself by an original negation should not be 
being nor that it should not be this being; in order for its 
determination as the nothingness of being to be full, the 
for-itself must realize itself as a certain unique manner of 
not being this being. 

This absolute determination, which is the determination 
of quality as a profile of the “this,” belongs to the freedom 
of the For-itself. It is not; it is as “to-be.” Anyone may 
see this for himself by considering how the revelation of 
one quality of the thing appears always as a factual gratuity 
grasped across a freedom. While I can not make this orange 
peel cease being green, it is I who am responsible for my 
apprehending it as a rough green or a green roughness. But 
the relation figure-ground here is rather different from that 
of the this to the world. For instead of the figure’s appear- 
ing on an undifferentiated ground, it is wholly penetrated 
by the ground; it holds the ground within it as its own un- 
differentiated density. I apprehend the peel as green; its 
“brightness-roughness” is revealed as an inner undifferenti- 
ated ground and plenitude of being for the green. There is 
no abstraction here in the sense that abstraction separates 
what is united, for being always appears entire in it§ profile. 
But the realization of being conditions the abstraction, for 
the abstraction is not the apprehension of a quality “in mid- 
air” but of a this-quality where the undifferentiation of the 
inner ground tends toward absolute equilibrium. The green 
abstracted does not lose its density of being — otherwise it 
would be nothing more than a subjective mode of the for- 
itself — but the brightness, the shape, the roughness, etc., 
which are given across it dissolve in the nihilating equilibri- 
um of pure and simple massiveness. Abstraction, however, 
is a phenomenon of presence to being since abstract being 
preserves its transcendence. But it can be realized only as a 
presence to being beyond being; it is a surpassing. This 
presence to being can be realized only on the level of pos- 
sibility and in so far as the For-itself has to be its own pos- 
sibilities. The abstract is revealed as the meaning which 
quality has to be as co-present to the presence of a for-itself 
to-come. Thus the abstract green is the meaning-to-come of 
the concrete this in so far as it reveals itself to me through 
its profile “green-brightness-roughness.” The green is the pe- 
culiar possibility of this profile in so far as it is revealed 



TRANSCENDENCE 


261 


across the possibilities which I am; that is, in so far as it is 
made-to-be. But this brings us to instnimentality and the 
temporality of the world. We shall - return to this point. For 
the moment it is sufficient to say that the abstract haunts the 
concrete as a possibility fixed in the in-itself, which the con- 
crete has to be. Whatever our perception may be, as the orig- 
inal contact with being, the abstract is always there but to- 
come; I apprehend it in the future with my future. It is 
correlative with the peculiar possibility of my present con- 
crete negation as the possibility of being no more than this 
negation. The abstract is the meaning of this in so far as it 
reveals itself in the future across my possibility of fixing in 
in-itself the negation which I have to be. 

If someone should remind us here of the classic difficulties 
regarding abstraction, we should reply that they stem from 
the fact that the constitution of the “this” and the act of ab- 
straction are taken as distinct. It is certain that if the this 
does not include its own abstractions, there is no possibility 
of deriving them from it afterward. But it is in the very con- 
stitution of the this as this that the abstraction operates as 
the revelation in profile of my future. The For-itself is an 
“abstractor,” not because it could realize a psychological 
operation of abstraction but because it rises as a presence to 
being with a future — ^that is, a beyond being. In itself being 
is neither concrete nor abstract nor present nor future; it is 
what it is. Yet the abstraction does not enrich being; it is 
only the revelation of a nothingness of being beyond being. 
But we challenge anyone to formulate the classic objections 
to abstraction without deriving them implicitly from the con- 
sideration of being as a this. 

The original relation of the thises to one another can be 
neither interaction nor causality nor even the upsurge on 
the same ground of the world. If we suppose that the For- 
itself is present to one this, the other thises exist at the 
same time “in the world” but by virtue of being undiffer- 
entiated: they constitute the ground on which the this con- 
fronted is raised in relief. In order to establish any relation 
whatsoever between one this and another this, it is neces- 
sary that the second this be revealed rising up on the ground 
of the world on the occasion of an express negation which 
the For-itself has to be. But at the same time each this 
must be held at a distance from the other as not being the 
other by a negation of a purely external type. Thus the 



262 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

original relation of this to that is an external negation. That 
appears as not being this. And the external negation is re- 
vealed to the For-itself as a transcendent; it is outside, it 
is in-itself. How are we to understand it? 

The appearance of the this-that can he produced first 
only as totality. The primary relation here is the unity of a 
totality capable of disintegration; the For-itself is deter- 
mined en bloc to not-be “this-that” on the ground of the 
world. The “this-that” is my whole room in so far as I am 
present to it. This concrete negation will not then dis- 
appear with the disintegration of the concrete mass into 
this and that. On the contrary it is the very condition of 
the disintegration. But on this ground of presence and by 
means of this ground of presence, being effects the appear- 
ance of its indifferent exteriority. This exteriority is revealed 
to me in the fact that the negation which I am is a unity- 
multiplicity rather than an undifferentiated totality. My neg- 
ative upsurge into being is parceled out into independent 
negations which have no connection other than that they are 
negations which I have to be; that is, they derive their inner 
unity from me and not from being. I am present to that 
table, to those chairs, and as such I constitute myself syn- 
thetically as a polyvalent negation; but this purely inner ne- 
gation, in so far as it is a negation of being, is paralyzed 
with zones of nothingness; it is nihilated by virtue of ne- 
gation, it is negation detotalized. Across these striations of 
nothingness which - 1 have to be as my own nothingness of 
negation, appears the indifference of being. But this indiffer- 
ence I have to realize by this nothingness of negation 
which I have to be, not in so far as I am originally present 
to the “this” but in so far as I am also present to the “that.” 
It is in and by my presence to the table that I realize the 
indifference of the chair (which presently I also have to not- 
be) as an absence of a springboard, an arrest of my impulse 
toward non-being, a breakdown in the circuit. “That” ap- 
pears alongside “this,” in the heart of a total revelation, as 
that from which I can in no way profit so as to determine 
myself to not-be “this.” 

Thus^ cleavage comes from being, but there is cleavage and 
separation only through the presence of the For-itself to all 
of being. The negation of the unity of the negations, in so 
ar as it is a revelation of the indifference of being and in 
so far as it apprehends the indifference of the “this” with 



TRANSCENDENCE 


263 


regard to the “that” and the “that” with regard to the “this,” 
is a revelation of the original relation of the thises in an ex- 
ternal negation. The “this” is not “that.” This external ne- 
gation within the unity of. a totality capable of disintegration 
is expressed by the word “and.” “This is not that” is written 
“this and that.” The external negation has the double char- 
acter of being-inTtself and of being pure ideality. It is in- 
itself in that it does not in any way belong to the For-itself; 
the For-itself discovers the indifference of being as exterior- 
ity across the- absolute interiority of its own negation (since 
in aesthetic intuition I apprehend an imaginary object). 
Moreover we are not dealing with a negation which being 
has to be; this negation does not belong to any of the thises 
considered; it purely and simply is. It is what it is. But at 
the same time it is by no means a characteristic of the this, 
by no means one of its qualities. It is even totally independ- 
ent of the thises, precisely because it does not belong to any 
one of them. For the indifference of being is nothing; 
we can not think it or even perceive it. It means simply 
that annihilation or the variations of the that can engage 
the this in nothing; in this sense it is only a nothingness in- 
-itself separating the thises, and this nothingness is the only 
piode in which consciousness can realize the cohesion of 
identity which characterizes being. 

This ideal nothingness in-itself is quantity. Quantity in 
fact is pure exteriority; it does not depend on the terms add- 
ed but is only the affirmation of their independence. To 
count is to make an ideal distinction inside a totality capable 
of disintegration and already given. The number obtained by 
the addition does not belong to any of the thises counted nor 
to the totality capable of disintegration — ^in so far as this is 
revealed as totality. If there are three men talking opposite 
oie, it is not as I apprehend them first as a “group in conver- 
sation” that I count them; and the fact of counting them as 
three leaves the concrete unity of their group perfectly intact. 
Being a “group of three” is not a concrete property of the 
group. Neither is it a property of its members. We can not 
say of any of/ them that he is three nor even that he is a 
third — ^for the quality of third is only a reflection of the free- 
dom of the for-itself which is counting; each one of the men 
can be a third, but no one of them is it. The relation of quan- 
tity is therefore a relation in-itself but a purely negative and 
external relation. It is precisely because it does not belong 


264 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


either to things or to totalities that it is isolated and de- 
tached from the surface of the world as a reflection (reflet) 
of nothingness cast on being. As a purely exterior relation 
between the thises, quantity is itself exterior to them and 
finally exterior to itself. It is the inapprehensible indiffer- 
ence of being — ^which can appear only if there is being 
and which, although belonging to being, can come to it 
only from a for-itself, inasmuch as this indifference can be 
revealed only by the exteriorization to infinity of a relation 
of exteriority which must be exterior to being and to it- 
self. Thus space and quantity are only one and the same 
type of negation. By the sole fact that this and that are re- 
vealed as having no relation to me who am my own relation, 
space and quantity come into the world; for each one of 
them is the relation of things which are unrelated or, if you 
prefer, the nothingness of relation apprehended as a rela- 
tion by the being which is its own relation. From this we 
can see that what Husserl calls categories (unity-multiplic- 
ity-relation of the whole to the part — more and less — 
around — beside — following — ^first, second, etc. — one, two, 
three, etc . — ^within and without — etc .) — these are only 
the ideal mixing of things which leaves them wholly intact, 
without either enriching or impoverishing them by one 
jota; they merely indicate the infinite diversity of ways in 
which the freedom of the for-itself can realize the indiffer- 
ence of being. 

We have treated the problem of the original relation of 
the for-itself to being as if the for-itself were a simple, in- 
stantaneous consciousness such as can be revealed to the 
Cartesian cogito. In truth we have already encountered the 
escape from self on the part of the for-itself inasmuch as 
this is the necessary condition for the appearance of the 
thises and of abstractions. But the ekstatic character of the 
for-itself was still only implicit. While we have had to pro- 
ceed in this way for the sake of clarity in exposition, we 
should not thereby conclude that being is revealed to a being 
which would be first presence in order afterwards to con- 
stitute itself a future. But being-in-itself is -revealed to a 
being which arises as about-to-come to itself. This means 
that the negation which the for-itself makes itself be in the 
presence of being has an ekstatic dimension of the future; 
It IS m so far as I am not what I am (an ekstatic relation 
to my own possibilities) that I have to not-be .being-in-itself 



TRANSCENDENCE 


265 


as the revealing realization of the this. That means that I am 
presence to the “this” in the incompleteness of a totality 
detotalized. What consequence is there here for the revelation 
of the this? 

Since I am always beyond what I am, about-to-come to 
myself, the “this” to which I am present appears to me as 
something which I surpass toward myself. The perceived is 
originally the surpassed; it is like a conductor in the circuit 
of selfness, and it appears within the limits of this circuit. 
To the extent that I make myself be the negation of the 
this, I flee this negation in the direction of a complemen- 
tary negation; and the fusion of the two would effect the 
appearance of the in-itself which I am. There is a bond of 
being between the negation of the this and the second pos- 
sible negation; the second is not just any negation but is pre- 
cisely the complementary negation of my presence to the 
thing. But since the for-itself constitutes itself qua presence, 
as .a non-positional self-consciousness, it makes known to 
itself, outside itself, through being, what it is not. It re- 
covers its being outside in the mode “reflection-reflect- 
ing.” The complementary negation which the for-itself is 
as its own possibility is then a negation-presence; that is, 
the for-itself has to be it as a non-thetic self-consciousness 
and as a thetic consciousness of being-beyond-being. 

Being-beyond-being is bound to the present this, not by 
any kind of external relation but by a precise bond of 
complementarity which stands in exact correlation with the 
relation of the for-itself to its future. First of all, the this 
is revealed in the negation of a being which medces itself 
to not-be this, not by virtue of simple presence, but as a 
negation which is about-to-come to itself, which is its own 
possibility beyond its present. This possibility which haunts 
pure presence as its meaning out of reach and as that which 
it lacks in order to be in-itself exists first as a projection of 
the present negation by virtue of engagement. Every nega- 
tion in fact which would not have beyond itself in the fu- 
ture the meaning of an engagement as a possibility which 
comes to it and toward which it flees itself, would lose all 
its significance as negation. What the for-itself denies, it 
denies “with the dimension of a future.” It involves either 
an external negation (this is not that, that chair is not a 
table) or an internal negation bearing on itself. To say that 
“this is not that” is to posit the exteriority of the “this” in 



266 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


relation to the “that,” whether for now and for the future 
or in the strict “now”; but in the latter case the negation 
has a provisory character which constitutes the future as pure 
exteriority in relation to the present determination “this and 
that.” In both cases the meaning comes to the negation in 
terms of the future; all negation is ekstatic. In so far as the 
for-itself denies itself in the future, the this concerning 
which it makes itself a negation is revealed as coming to it- 
self from the future. The possibility that consciousness exists 
non-thetically as consciousness (of) being able not to not- 
be this is revealed as the potentiality of the this of being 
what it is. The first potentiality of the object, as the corre- 
late of the engagement, an ontological structure of the ne- 
gation, is permanence, which perpetually comes to it on the 
ground of the future. The revelation of the table as table 
requires a permanence of table which comes to it from the 
future and which is not a purely established given, but a 
potentiality. This permanence moreover does not come to 
the table from a future located in temporal infinity. Infinite 
time does not yet exist. The table is not revealed as having 
the possibility of being a table indefinitely. The time con- 
cerned here is neither finite nor infinite; potentiality merely 
causes the dimension of the future to appear. 

When we speak of the meaning-to-corae of the negation, 
we refer to that which the negation of the for-itself lacks 
in order to become a negation in itself. In this sense the 
negation is, in the future, the precision® of the present nega- 
tion. It is in the future that there is revealed the exact mean- 
ing^ of what I have to not-be as a correlate of the exact ne- 
gation which I have to be. The polymorphic negation of the 
this, where the green is formed by a totality “roughness- 
light,” gets its meaning only if it has to be the negation of 
the green; that is, of a being-green, the ground of which 
tends toward the equilibrium of undifferentiation. In a word, 
the absent-meaning of my polymorphic negation is a nega- 
lon confined by a green more purely green on an undiffer- 
entiated ground. Thus the pure green comes to the “green- 
roughness-light” on the ground of the future as its meaning. 

e apprehend here^ the meaning of what we have called 
a straction. The ewstent does not possess its essence as a 
present quality It is even the negation of essence: the green 

^ technical sense of ‘‘determination’' or “giving an exact 



TRANSCENDENCE 


267 


, never is green. But the essence comes from the ground of 
the future to the existent, as a meaning which is never given 
and which forever haunts it. It is the pure correlate of the 
pure ideality of my negation. In this sense there is no such 
thing as an operation of abstraction if we mean by that a 
psychological afiirmative act of selection effected by a con- 
stituted mind. Far from abstracting certain qualities in terms 
of things, we must on the contrary view abstraction as the 
original mode of being of the for-itself, necessary in order 
that there may be, in general, things and a world. The ab- 
stract is a structure of the world and is necessary for the up- 
surge of the concrete; the concrete is concrete only in so far 
as it leans in the direction of its abstraction, that it makes it- 
self known by the abstraction which it is. The being of the 
for-itself is revealing-abstracting. We see that from this point 
of view permanence and the abstract are only one. If the 
table has qua table a potentiality of permanence, this is to the 
exact degree that it has to be a table. Permanence is pure pos- 
sibility for a this to be consistent with its essence. 

We have seen in Part Two of this work that the relation 
between the possible which I am and the present which I 
am fleeing is the same as the relation between the lacking 
and the one which lacks what is lacking. The ideal fusion 
of the lacking with the one which lacks what is lacking is 
an unrealizable totality which haunts the for-itself and con- 
stitutes its very being as a nothingness of being. This 
ideal we called the in-itself-for-itself or value. But on the 
unreflective level this value is not grasped thetically by the 
for-itself; it is only a condition of being. If our conclusions 
are accurate, this perpetual indication of an unrealizable fu- 
sion must appear not as a structure of the unreflective con- 
sciousness but as a transcendent indication of an ideal struc- 
ture of the object. This structure can be easily revealed; 
correlative with the indication of a fusion of the polymor- 
phic negation with the abstract negation which is its mean- 
ing, there is to be revealed a transcendent and ideal indi- 
cation — that of a fusion of the existing this with its essence 
to-come. Thus fusion must be such that the abstract is the 
foundation of the concrete and that simultaneously the con- 
crete is the foundation of the abstract. In other words, the 
concrete “flesh and blood” existence must be the essence, and 
the essence must itself be produced as a total concretion; 
that is, it must have the full richness of the concrete with- 


268 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 




out however allowing us to discover in it anything other 
than itself in its total purity. Or if you prefer, the form 
must be to itself — and totally — ^its own matter. And converse- 
ly the matter must be produced as absolute form. 

This perpetually indicated but impossible fusion of es- 
sence and existence does not belong either to the present or 
the future; it indicates rather the fusion of past, present, 
and future, and it presents itself as a synthesis to be effected 
of temporal totality. It is value as transcendence; it is what 
we call beauty. Beauty therefore represents an ideal state of 
the world, correlative with an ideal realization of the for- 
itself; in this realization the essence and the existence of 
things are revealed as identity to a being who, in this very 
revelation, would be merged with himself in the absolute 
unity of the in-itself. This is precisely because the beautiful 
is not only a transcendent synthesis to be effected but be- 
cause it can be realized only in and through a totalization of 
ourselves. This is precisely why we desire the beautiful and 
why we apprehend the universe as lacking the beautiful to 
the extent that we ourselves apprehend ourselves as a lack. 
But the beautiful is no more a potentiality of things than the 
m-itself-for-itself is a peculiar possibility of the for-itself. 
It haunts^ the world as an unrealizable. To the extent that 
man realizes the beautiful in the world, he realizes it in the 
^aginary mode. This means that in the aesthetic intuition, 
I apprehend an imaginary object across an imaginary realiza- 
nayself as a totality in-itself and for-itself. Ordinarily 
the beautiful, like value, is not thematically made explicit as 
a value-out-of-reach-of-the-world. It is implicitly apprehend- 
ed on things as an absence; it is revealed implicitly across the 
imperfection of the world. 


These original potentialities are not the only ones which 
characterize the this. To the extent that the for-itself has 
to be Its bemg beyond its present, it is the revelation of a 
qualified beyond-bemg, which comes to the “this” on the 
^oun of being. In so far as the for-itself is beyond the 
moon, next to a being-beyond-being which is the 
, ^ moon the full moon becomes the potentiality of 

hurl ^ for-itself is beyond the 

hnw’ TT, ° the flower, the flower is a potentiality of the 
oritHnai ^ ^tion of these new potentialities implies an 

nection htu ^ ^^^t the con- 

een the crescent moon and the full moon, be- 



TRANSCENDENCE 


269 


tweea the bud and the flower is gradually discovered. The 
past of the for-itself stands as empirical knowledge for the 
for-itself. But this knowledge does not remain as an inert 
given. It is behind the for-itself, of course, unrecognizable 
as such and out of reach. But in the ekstatic unity of its be- 
ing, it is in terms of this past that the for-itself makes known 
to itself what it is in the future. My wisdom (savoir) as re- 
gards the moon escapes me as a thematic knowledge (con- 
naissance) . But I am it,- and my way of being is — at least m 
certain cases — to cause what I no longer am to come to me 
in the form of what I am not yet. This negation of the this 
— ^which I have been — I am in two ways: in the mode of not 
being any longer and of not being yet. I am beyond the cres- 
cent moon as the possibility of a radical negation of the 
moon as a full disc; and correlative with the return of my 
future negation toward my presence, the full moon comes 
back toward the crescent in order to determine it in this as a 
negation; the full moon is what the crescent lacks; it is the 
lack of the full moon which makes the crescent a crescent 
Thus within the unity of the same ontological negation, I 
attribute the dimension of the future to the crescent as cres- 
cent — ^in the form of permanence and essence — and I con- 
stitute it as the crescent moon by the determining return 
toward it of what it lacks. Thus is constituted the scale of 
possibilities which reaches from permanence to potencies. Hu- 
man-reality, by surpassing itself in the direction of its own 
possibility of negation, makes itself that by which negation 
through surpassing comes into the world. It is through hu- 
man reality that lack comes to things in the form of “po- 
tency,” of “incompletion,” of “suspension,” of “potentiali- 
ty.” 

Nevertheless the transcendent being of lack can not have 
the nature of ekstatic lack in immanence. Let us look at it 
more carefully. The in-itself does not have to be its own 
potentiality in the mode of not-yet The revelation of the 
in-itself is originally a revelation of the self-identity of indif- 
ference. The in-itself is what it is without any ekstatic dis- 
persion of its being. It does not have to be its permanence 
or its essence or that which it lacks as I have to be my fu- 
ture. My upsurge into the world causes potentialities to arise 
correlatively. But these potentialities are fixed in their very 
arising; they are eaten away by exteriority. We shall discover 
here again that double aspect of the transcendent which in 



270 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


its very ambiguity has given birth to space: a totality which 
is dispersed in relations of exteriority. Potentiality on the 
ground of the future turns back on the this to determine it, 
but the relation between the this as in-itself and its potenti- 
ality is an external relation. The crescent moon is determined 
as lacking or deprived of — ^in relation to the full moon. 
But at the same time the crescent is revealed as being fully 
what it is — ^that concrete sign in the sky, which needs noth- 
ing in order to be what it is. The same is true for this bud 
or for this match, which is What it is, for which its meaning 
as being-a-match remains exterior, which can of course burst 
into flame but which at present is this piece of white wood 
with a black tip. The potentialities of the this, while strict- 
ly connected with it, are present as in-itselfs and are in a 
state of indifference in relation to it. This inkwell can be 
broken, thrown against the marble of the fireplace where it 
wfil be shattered. But this potentiality is entirely cut off 
for it is only the transcendent correlate of my pos- 
sibility of throwing the inkwell against the marble of the 
fireplace. In itself the inkwell is neither breakable nor un- 
breakable; it is. 


That does not mean that I can consider a this as outside 
all potentiality; from the mere fact that I am my own future, 
the this is revealed as provided with potentialities. To ap- 
prehend the match as a piece of white wood with a black tip 
IS not to strip it of all potentiality but simply to confer on it 
new ones (a new permanence — a new essence). In order for 
the this to be entirely deprived of potentialities, it would be 
necessary that I be a pure present, which is inconceivable. 
But the^ this has various potentialities which are equivalents 
^that is, in a state of equivalence in relation to it. This is 
. ^use it does not have to he them. In addition my possi- 
ties do not exist but are possibilized because they are eat- 
en away from within by my freedom; that is, whatever my 

opposite is equally possible. I can shatter 
tos u^ell but I can just as well put it in a drawer. I can 
. ^ foil moon beyond the crescent moon, but I can 

3 s as well msist on the permanence of the crescent as such. 

^ found to be provided with 
to be put in a drawer, to be shat- 
or n V, moon can be an open curve in the sky 

bacV fa ®ospense. Those potentialities which refer 

IS Without being made to be by it and without 



TRANSCENDENCE 


271 


having to be — ^those we shall call probabilities to indicate 
that they exist in the mode of being of the in-itself. We can 
not say that my possibles are; they are possibilized. But 
probabilities are not “probabilized,” they are each one in it- 
self as probable. In this sense the inkweU is, but its being- 
an-inkwell is a probable; for the inkwell’s having-to-be-an- 
inkwell is a pure appearance which is founded immediately 
on a relation of exteriority. 

These potentialities or probabilities, which are the mean- 
ing of being beyond being, are in-itselfs beyond being, and 
precisely for this reason they are nothings. The essence of 
the inkwell is made-to-be as a correlate of the possible ne- 
gation of the for-itself, but it is not the inkwell and it is not 
being. In so far as this essence is in-itself, it 'is a negation 
hypostasized and reified; that is, it is a nothing, it belongs 
to the shell of nothingness which encases and determines 
the world. The for-itself reveals the inkwell as an inkwell. 
But this revelation is made beyond the being of the inkwell, 
in that future which is not; all the potentialities of being, 
from permanence to qualified potentialities, are defined as 
that which being is not yet without ever truly having to be 
them. Here again knowledge adds nothing to being and 
removes nothing from it; knowledge adorns it with no new 
quality. It causes being to-be-there by surpassing it toward 
a nothingness which enters into only negative exterior rela- 
tions with it. This character of pure nothingness in poten- 
tiality results in efforts on the part of science, which aims at 
establishing relations of simple exteriority, radically to sup- 
press the potential (essence and potencies). But on the oth- 
er hand the necessity of potentiality as a meaningful struc- 
ture of perception appears clearly enough so that we need 
not insist on it here. Scientific knowledge, in fact, can nei- 
ther overcome nor suppress the potentializing structure of 
perception. On the contrary science must presuppose it. 

We have attempted to show how the presence of the for- 
itself to being reveals being as a thing, and for the sake of 
clarity in exposition we have had to show successively the 
various structures of the thing; the this and spatiality, per- 
manence, essence and potentialities. It is evident, however, 
that this successive account does not correspond to a real 
priority of certain of these moments over others: the upsurge 
of the for-itself causes the thing to be revealed with the 
totality of its structures. Furthermore there is not one of 



272 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


these structures which does not imply all the others. The 
this does not have even logical priority over essence. On the 
contrary the this presupposes essence, and conversely essence 
is the essence of this. Similarly the this as the being-of-a- 
quality can appear only on the ground of the world, but the 
world is a collection of thises; the disintegrating relation of 
the world to the thises, of the thises to the world is spatial- 
ity. There is therefore no substantial form here, no prin- 
ciple of unity to stand behind the modes of appearance of 
the phenomenon; everything is given at one stroke without 
any primacy. For the same reasons, it would be incorrect to 
conceive of any kind of primacy as concerns the representa- 
tive. Our descriptions have led us to put in relief the thing 
in the^ world, and because of this fact we might be tempted 
to believe that the world and the thing are revealed to the 
for-itself in a sort of contemplative intuition. This, how- 
ever, would be an intuition after the event such that objects 
would be arranged one in relation to another in a practical 
order of instrumentality. Such an error will be avoided if 
we are willing to maintain that the world appears inside the 
cu*cuit of selfness. It is this which separates the for-itself 
from itself or— to employ an expression of Heidegger’s— it 

® ^ terms of which human reality makes known to it- 
self what It IS. 


'Hus project toward self on the part of the for-itself, 
which constitutes selfness, is in no way a contemplative re- 
pose. It is a lack, as we have said, but not a given lack. It 
IS a lack which has to be to itself its own lack. It must be 
understood that an established lack or a lack in-itself van- 
ishes mto exterionty, as we have pointed out in preceding 
passages. But a being which constitutes itself as lack can de- 
termme itself only there upon that which it lacks and which 
f perpetual wrenching away from self to- 
hp f which it has to be. This means that lack can 

as a refused lack: the only 

tw .connection between that which lacks and 

IS lacking IS the refusal. In fact to the extent that 
® it we ep- 

awal^-ntf ^ if negation is not to slip 

of exterionty — and along with it all possibility 

foundation must be to the ne- 

S r® ‘ticks ,o be that which it 

lacks. Thus the foundation of the negation is negation of 


TRANSCENDENCE 


273 


negatiqn. But this negation-foundation is no more a given 
than the lack of which it is an essential moment; it is as hav- 
ing to be. The for-itself in the phantom unity “reflection- 
reflecting” makes itself be its own lack; that is, it pro- 
jects itself toward its lack by refusing it. It is only as a lack 
to be suppressed that lack can be internal for the for-itself, 
and the for-itself can realize its own lack only by having to 
be it; that is, by being a project toward its suppression. 
Thus the relation of the for-itself to its future is never static 
nor given; the future comes to the present of the for-itself 
in order to determine it in its heart inasmuch as the for- 
itself is already there at the future as its suppression. The 
for-itself can be a lack here only if it is there a suppression 
of the lack, but a suppression which it has to be in the mode 
of non-being. It is this original relation which subsequently 
allows the empirical establishment of particular lacks as 
lacks suffered or endured. It is in general the foundation 
of affectivity; it is this also which some will try to explain 
psychologically by installing mthin the psyche those idols 
and those phantoms which we call drives or appetites. These 
drives or these forces, which by violence are inserted into 
the psyche, are not understandable in themselves, for they 
are given by the psychologist as in-itself existents; that is, 
their very character as force is contradicted by their inner 
repose of indifference, and their unity is dispersed in a pure 
relation of exteriority. We can apprehend them only as the 
result of projecting into the in-itself a relation of immanent 
being of the for-itself to itself and this ontological relation 
is precisely lack. 

But this lack can not be grasped thetically and known by 
the unreflective consciousness (nor does it appear to the im- 
pure, accessory reflection which apprehends it as a psychic 
object — i.e., as a drive or as a feeling). It is accessible only 
to the purifying reflection, with which we are not here con- 
cerned. On the level of consciousness of the world, this 
lack can appear only in projection, as a transcendent and 
ideal characteristic. In fact while that which the for-itself 
lacks is the ideal presence to a being-beyond-being, the be- 
ing-beyond-being is originally apprehended as the lacking- 
to-being. Thus the world is revealed as haunted by absences 
to be realized, and each this appears with a cortege of ab- 
sences which point to it and determine it These absences 



274 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


are not basically different from potentialities. But it is easier 
to grasp their meaning. Thus the absences indicate the this 
as this, and conversely the this points toward the absences. 
Since each absence is being-beyond-being — i.e., an absent- 
in-itself — each this points toward another state of its being 
or toward other beings. But of course this organization of 
indicative complexes is fixed and petrified in in-itself; hence 
all these mute and petrified indications, which fall back into 
the indifference of isolation at the same time that they arise, 
resemble the fixed, stony smile in the empty eyes of a statue. 


The absences which appear behind things do not appear 
as absences to be made present by things. Neither can we 
say that they are revealed as to be realized by me since the 
“me” is a transcendent structure of the psyche and appears 
only to the reflective consciousness. They are pure demands 
which rise as “voids to be filled” in the middle of the cir- 
cuit of selfness. Their character as “voids to be filled by the 
' for-itself” is manifested to the unreflective consciousness by 
a direct and personal urgency which is lived as such without 
being referred to somebody or thematized. It is in and 
through the very fact of living them as claims that there is 
revealed what in an earlier chapter we called their selfness. 
They are tasks, and this world is a world of tasks. In rela- 


tion to the tasks, the this which they indicate is both “the 
this of these tasks” — ^that is, the unique in-itself which is 
determined by them and which they indicate as being able 
to fulfill them — and that which does not have to be these 
tasks since it exists in the absolute unity of identity. This 
comection in isolation, this inert relation within the dynam- 
ic is what we call the relation of means to end. It is a being- 
for which is degraded, laminated by exteriority, a being-for 
whose transcendent ideality can be conceived only as a cor- 
rel^ of the being-for which the for-itself has to be. 

. ® in so far as it both rests in the quiet beatitude 

of mdifference and yet points beyond it to tasks to be per- 
fOTmed which make known to it what it has to be, is an in- 
L utensil. The original relation between things, 

a which appears on the foundation of the quantitative re- 
a on o the thises, is the relation of instrumentality. This 
mstn^entahty is not subsequent to or subordinate to the 
s rue res already ^ indicated: in one sense it presupposes 
^ presupposed by them. The thing is 

s a thing m order to be subsequently an instrument; 


TRANSCENDENCE 


275 


neither is it first an instrument in order .to be revealed sub- 
sequently as a thing. It is an instrumental-thing. It is true, 
nevertheless, that the further research of the scientist will 
reveal it as purely a thing — i.e., stripped of all instru- 
mentality. But this is because the scientist is concerned only 
with establishing purely exterior relations. Moreover the re- 
sult of this scientific research is that the thing itself, deprived 
of all instrumentality, finally disappears into absolute ex- 
teriority. We can see to what extent we must correct Heideg- 
ger’s definition: to be sure, the world appears in the circuit 
of selfness; but since the circuit is non-thetic, the maldng 
known of what I am can not be thetic either. To be in the 
world is not to escape from the world toward oneself but to 
escape from the world toward a beyond-the-world which is 
the future world. What the world makes known to me is 
only “worldly.” It follows that if the infinite reference of 
instruments never refers to a for-itself which I am, then 
the totality of instruments is the exact correlate of my pos- 
sibilities; and as I am my possibilities, the order of instru- 
ments in the world is the image of my possibilities projected 
in the in-itself; i.e., the image of what I am. But I can nev- 
er decipher this worldly image; I adapt myself to it in and 
through action, but a reflective scissiparity would be required 
m order for me to be able to be an object to myself. 

It is not then through unauthenticity that human reality 
loses itself in the world. For human reality, being-in-the- 
world means radically to lose oneself in the world through 
the very revelation which causes there to be a world — ^that is, 
to be referred without respite, without even the possibility 
of “a purpose for which” from instrument to instrument 
with no recourse save the reflective revolution. It would be 
useless to object that the chain of “for whats” is suspended 
from the “for whoms” (Worumwillen) . Of course the 
Worumwillen refers us to a structure of being which we have 
not yet elucidated; namely, the for-others. And the “for 
whom” constantly appears behind the instruments. But this 
“for whom,” whose constitution is different from the “for 
what,” does not break the chain. It is simply one of the 
links; when it is confronted in the perspective of instru- 
mentality, it does not allow an escape from the in-itself. To 
be sure Aese workclothes are for the worker. But they are 
for the worker so that he can fix the roof without getting 
dirty. And why shouldn’t he get dirty? In order not to spend 



276 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

most of his salary for clothes. This salary is, allotted him as 
the minimnm quantity of money which will enable him to 
support himself; and he “supports” himself so as to be able 
to apply his capacities for work at repairing roofs. And why 
should he repair the roof? So that it will not rain in the of- 
fice where employees are working at book-keeping. Etc. 
This does not mean that we should always think of the Oth- 
er as an instrument of a particular type, but merely that 
when we consider the Other in terms of the world, we do 
not escape even so from the infinite regress of instrumental 
complexes. 

Thus to the extent that the for-itself is its own lack as a 
refusal correlative with its impulse toward self, being is re- 
vealed to the for-itself on the ground of the world as an in- 
strumental-thing, and the world rises as the undifferentiated 
ground of indicative complexes of instrumentality. The en- 
semble of these references is void of meaning but in this 
sense — ^that the possibility of positing the problem of mean- 
ing on this level does not exist. We work to live and we 
live to work. The question of the meaning of the totality 
“life-work” — “Why do I work, I who am living? Why live 
if it is in order to work?” — ^this can be posited only on the 
reflective level since it implies a self-discovery on the part 
of the for-itself. 

It remains to explain how as a correlate of the pure nega- 
tion which I am, instrumentality can arise in the world. How 
does it happen that I am not a barren, indefinitely repeated 
negation of the this as pure this? If I am nothing but the . 
pure nothingness which I have to be, how can this n^a- ^ 
tion reveal a plurality of tasks which are my image? In order 
to answer this question we must recall that the, for-itself is , 
not purely and simply a future which comes to the present. 
It has to be also its past in the form of “was?* The ekstatic 
contradiction in the three temporal dimensions is such that 
while the for-itself is a being which by means of its futoe 
makes known to itself the meaning of what it was, it is 
also in the same upsurge a being which has to be its will-be 
within the perspectives of a certain “was” which it is fleeing. 
In this sense we must always look for the meaning of a 
temporal dimension elsewhere, in another dimension. This 
.K. what we have called the diaspora, for the unity of di- 
asporatic being is not a pure given appurtenance; it is the 



TRANSCENDENCE 277 

necessity of realizing the diaspora by making itself condi- 
tioned there outside within the unity of the self. 

Therefore the negation which I am and which reveals the 
“this” has to be in the mode of “was.” This pure negation 
which as simple presence is not, has its being behind it, as 
past or facticity. As such we must recognize that it is never a 
negation without roots. On the contrary, it is a qualified ne- 
gation — ^if by that we understand that it drags its qualifica- 
tion behind it as the being which it has to not-be in the 
form of “was.” The negation arises as a non-thetic negation 
of the past in the mode of internal determination in so far 
as it makes itself a thetic negation of the this. The upsurge 
is effected in the unity of a double “being for,” since the 
negation effects its existence in the mode of reflection- 
reflecting, as the negation of the this, in order to escape 
from the past which it is; it escapes from the past in order 
to disengage itself from the this by fleeing it in its being 
toward the future. This is what we shall call the point of 
view which the for-itself has on the world. This point of 
view, comparable to facticity, is the ekstatic qualification of 
the negation as the original relation to the in-itself. On the 
other hand, as we have seen, everything that is for-itself is 
so in the mode of “was”' as an ekstatic appurtenance of the 
world. It is not in the future that I rediscover my presence 
since the future releases the world to me as correlative with 
a consciousness to-cpme. Rather my being appears to me in 
the past, although non-thematically, within the compass of 
being-in-itself; that is, in relief in the midst of the world. 

Of course this being is still consciousness of — that is, 

a foivitself; but it is a for-itself fixed in in-itself, and con- 
sequently while a consciousness of the world, it is fallen 
into the midst of the world. The meaning of realism, of 
naturalism, and of materialism lies in the past; these three 
philosophies are descriptions of the past as if it were present 

The for-itself is then a double flight from the world; it 
escapes its own being-ih-the-midst-of-the-world as a presence 
to a world which it is fleeing. The possible is the free end 
of the flight The for-itself can not flee toward a transcen- 
dent which it is not, but only toward a transcendent which 
it is. It is this fact which removes all possibility of surcease 
from this perpetual flight. If I may use a down-to-earth im- 
age for the sake of making my thought clearer, picture an 
ass drawing behind him ^ cart. He attempts to get hold of a 



278 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


carrot which has been fastened at the end of a stick which 
in turn has been tied to the shaft of the cart. Every effort on 
the part of the ass to seize the carrot results in advancing 
the whole apparatus and the cart itself, which always re- 
mains at the same distance from the ass. Thus we run after 
a possible which our very running causes to appear, which 
is nothing but our running itself, and which thereby is by 
definition out of reach. We run toward ourselves and we 
are — due to this very fact — the being which can not be re- 
united with itself. In one sense the running is void of mean- 
ing since the goal is never ^ven but invented and projected 
proportionately as we run toward it In another sense we can 
not refuse to it that meaning which it rejects since in spite 
of everything possibility is the meaning of the for-itself. 
Thus there is and there is not a meaning in the flight 
Now in that very flight from the past which I am toward 
the future which I am, the future is prefigured in relation 
to the past at the same time that it confers on the past all 
its meaning. The future is the past surpassed as a given in» 
iteelf toward an in-itself which would be its own founda- 
tion — that is, which would be in so far as I should have to 
be it My possibility is the free recovery of my past in so far 
as this recovery can rescue it by providing its foundation. I 
flee the being without foundation ^hich I was toward the 
founding act which I can be only in the mode of the I would 
be. Thus the possible is the lack which the for-itself makes 
itself be; that is, which is lacking to the present negation 
m so far as it is a qualified negation (a negation which has 
its quality outside itself in the past). As such the possible 
is itself qualified — ^not by virtue of being a given, which 
would be its own quality in the world of the in-itself, but 
as an indication of the recovery which would found -the- 
ekstatic qualification which the for-itself was. ' 

Thus thirst, for example, is three dimensional: it is a pres- 
ent flight from a state of emptiness which the for-itself was. 
This very flight confers on the given state its character of 
emptiness or lack; in the past the lack could not be lack, for 
the given can be “lacking” only if it is surpassed toward 
~ -by a being which is its own transcendence. But this 

flight a flight toward and it is this “toward” 

v/hich gives fli^t its meaning. As such flight is itself a lack 
which makes itself — that is, a constitution in the past of a 
given as a lack or potentiality and at the same time the free 



TRANSCENDENCE 


279 


recovery of the given by a for-itself which makes itself a 
lack in the form, the “reflection-reflecting” — ^that is, as con- 
sciousness of lack. Finally that toward which the lack is fled, 
in so far as it causes itself to be conditioned in its being-a- 
lack by that which it lacks, is the possibility that it is to be 
a thirst which would be no longer a lack but a thirst-reple- 
tion. The possible is the indication of the repletion; value, 
as a phantom-being which surrounds and penetrates the for- 
itself through and through, is the indication of a thirst 
which would be simultaneously a given — as it “was it” — 
and a recovery — as the game of “the reflection-reflecting” 
constitutes it ekstatically. As one can see, we are dealing 
here with a plenitude which determines itself as thirst. The 
ekstatic relation past-present provides the outline of this 
plenitude with the structure “thirst” as its meaning, and 
the possible which I am must furnish its very density, its 
fleshly plenitude, as reflection (reflexion). 

Thus my presence to being which determines it as this is 
a negation of the “this” in so far as I am also a qualified 
lack beside the ^'this” To the extent that my possible is a 
possible presence to being beyond being, the qualification of 
my possible reveals a being-beyond-being as the being whose 
co-presence is a co-presence strictly linked with a repletion 
to-come. Thus absence in the world is revealed as a being 
to-be-realized in so far as this being is correlative with the 
possible-being which 1 lack. The glass of water appears as 
about-to-be-drunk; that is, as the correlate of a thirst grasped 
non-thetically and its very being as about to be satisfied. 
But these descriptions, which all imply a relation to the fu- 
ture of the world, will be clearer if we at present explain 
how the time of the world or universal time is revealed to 
consciousness on the ground of the original negation. 


IV. THE TIME OF THE WORLD 

Universal time comes into the world through the For-it- 
self. The in-itself is not adapted to temporality precisely be- 
cause it is in-itself and because temporality is the mode of 
Unitary being in a being which is perpetually at a distance 
from itself for itself. The For-itself, on the contrary, is tem- 
porality, but it is not consciousness of temporality except 
when it produces itself in the relation “reflective-reflected- 



280 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

on.” In the unreflective mode the for-itself discovers tem- 
porality on being— that is, outside. Universal temporality is 
objective. 


A. The Past 

The “this” does not appear as a present which later wiU 
have to become past and which before that was future. This 
inkwell the moment I perceive it already exists in the three 
temporal dimensions. In so far as I apprehend it as perma- 
nence — i.e., as essence — it is already in the future although 
I am not present to it in my actual presence but as about-to- 
come-to-myself. By the same token, I can not apprehend it 
except as having already been there in the world inasmuch 
as I was already there myself as presence. In this sense there 
exists no “synthesis of recognition” if we mean by that a 
progressive operation of identification which by successive 
organization of the “nows” would confer a duration on the 
thing perceived. The For-itself directs the explosion of its 
temporality against the whole length of the revealed in-itself 
as though against the length of an immense and monotonous 
waU of which it can not see the end. I am that original ne- 
gation which I have to be in the mode of not-yet and of 
already, beside the being which is what it is. If then we 
suppose a consciousness arising in a motionless world beside 
a unique being which is unchangeably what it is, this being 
will be revealed with a past and a future of immutabUily 
which will necessitate no “operation” of a synthesis and 
which will be one with its very revelation. The operation 
would be necessary only if the For-itself had to retain and 
to constitute its own past by the same stroke. But due to the 
mere fact that the in-itself is its own past as also its own fu- 
ture, ^^e revelation of the in-itself can only be temporalized. 
The this is revealed temporally not because it would be 
refracted^ across an a priori form of inner meaning but be- 
cause it is revealed to a revelation of which the very being 
IS temporalization. Nevertheless the atemporality of being 
is represented in its very revelation; in so far as it is grasped 
through and in a temporality which temporalizes itself, the 
this appears originally as temporal; but in so far as it is what 
It is, It refuses to be its own temporality and merely reflects 
time. In addition it reflects the internal ekstatic relation — ■ 



TRANSCENDENCE 


281 


which is at the source of temporality — as a purely objective 
relation of exteriority. Permanence, as a compromise between 
non-temporal identity and the ekstatic unity of temporaliza- 
tion, will appear therefore as the pure slipping by of in-it- 
self instants, little nothingnesses separated one from another 
and reunited by a relation of simple exteriority on the sur- 
' face of a being which preserves an atemporal immutability. 
It is not true therefore that the non-temporality of being 
escapes' us; on the contrary, it is given in time, it provides 
the foundation for the mode of being of universal time. 

In so far then as the For-itself “was” what it is, the in- 
strument or thing appears to it as having been already there. 
The For-itself can be presence to the this only as a presence 
which was; all perception is in-itself, and without any “op- 
eration” it is a recollection. Now what is revealed across the 
ekstatic unity of Past and Present is an identical being. It is 
not' apprehended as being the same as the past and the 
present but as being it. Temporality is only a tool of vi- 
sion. Yet this it which it is, the “this” already was. Thus 
the this appears as having a past. But it refuses to be this 
past; it only has it. Temporality in so far as it is grasped ob- 
jectively as therefore a pure phantom, for it does not give 
itself as the temporality of the For-itself nor as the tem- 
porality which the in-itself has to be. At the same time the 
transcendent Past, since it is in-itself by virtue of transcen- 
dence, can not be as that which the Present has to be; the 
Past is isolated in a phantom of Selbstdndigkeit. And as 
each moment of the past is a “having-been Present,” this 
isolation is pursued to the very interior of the Past. Conse- 
quently the unchangeable this is revealed across a flickering 
and an infinite parceling out of phantom in-itselfs. This is 
how that glass or that table is revealed to me. They do not 
endure; they are. Time flows over them. v 

Of course someone will object that I merely fail to see 
changes in the glass or table. But this is to introduce very 
^appropriately a scientific point of view. Such a point of 
view, which nothing justifies, is contradicted by our very 
perception. The pipe, the pencil, all these beings which are 
released entire in each one of their “profiles” and whose 
permanence is wholly indifferent to the multiplicity of pro- 
files, are transcendent to all temporality even though they 
are revealed in temporality. The “thing” exists straightway 
^ a “form”; that is, a whole which is not affected by any of 


282 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


the superficial parasitic variations which we can see on it 
Each this is revealed with a law of being which determines 
its threshold, its level of change where it will cease to be 
what it is in order simply not to be. This law of being, 
which expresses “permanence,” is an immediately revealed 
structure of the essence of the “this”; it determines a limit- 
of-potentiality in the “this” — ^that of disappearing from the 
world. We shall return to this point. Thus the For-itself ap-" 
prehends temporality on being, as a pure reflection which 
plays on the surface of being without any possibility of mod- 
ifying being. The scientist will fix this absolute, spectral, 
nihilating quality of time m a concept under the name of 
homogeneity. But the transcendent apprehension on the in- 
itself of the ekstatic unity of the temporalizing For-itself is 
effected as the apprehension of an empty form of temporal 
unity without any being which founds that unity by being 
it. Thus on the plane of Present-Past, there appears that 
curious unity of the absolute dispersion which is external 
temporality. Here each before and each after is an “in-itself ’ 
isolated from others by its indifferent exteriority, and here 
these instants are reunited in the unity of one and the same 
being. And this common being or Time is nothing other than 
the very dispersion, conceived as necessity and substantiality. 
This contradictory nature could appear only on the double 
foundation of the For-itself and the In-itself. From this 
standpoint in so far as scientific reflection aims at hypostasiz- 
ing the relation of exteriority, being will be conceived — i.e., 
thought of an emptiness — ^not as a transcendence aimed at 
across time but as a content which passes from instant into in- 
stant. Better yet it will be conceived as a multiplicity of con- 
tents, extern^ to one another, and strictly resembling one 
another. 

So far our description of universal temporalitj^ has been 
attempted under the hypothesis that nothing may come from 
being save its non-temporal immutability. But something 
does come from being: what, for lack of a better term, we 
shall call abolitions and apparitions. These apparitions and 
abolitions ought to be the object of a purely metaphysical 
elucidation, not an ontological one, for we can conceive of 
their necessity neither from the standpoint of the structures 
of being of the For-itself nor of those of the In-itself. Their 
existence is that of a contingent and metaphysical fact. We 
do not know exactly what comes from being in the phenome- 


i 


TRANSCENDENCE 283 

non of apparition since this phenomenon is already the fact 
of a temporalized “this.” Yet experience teaches us that there 
are various upsurges and annihilations of the “this.” More- 
over since we know that perception reveals the In-itself and 
outside the In-itself nothing, we can consider the in-itself as 
the foun^tion of these upsurges and of these annihilations. 
In addition we see clearly that the principle of identity as the 
law of being of the in-itself requires that the abolition and 
the apparition be totally exterior to the in-itself which has 
appeared or been abolished, for otherwise the in-itself would 
at the same time both be and not be. The abolition can not 
be that falling away from being which is an end. Only the 
For-itself can know its falling away because it is to its itself 
its own end. Being, a quasi-affirmation in which the affirm- 
ing is coated over by the affirmed, exists without any inner 
finitude in the peculiar tension of its “self-affirmation.” Its 
“until then” is totally external to it. Thus the abolition does 
not involve the necessity of an after, which can be mani- 
fested only in a world and for an in-itself, but a quasi-after. 
This quasi-after can be expressed thus: being-in-itself can 
not effect the mediation between itself and its nothingness. 
Similarly apparitions are not adventures of the appearing 
being. That priority over itself which “adventure” would 
suppose can be found only in the For-itself, for which both 
apparition and end are inner adventures. Being is what it 
is. It is without “putting itself into being,” without child- 
hood or youth. That which has appeared is not a novelty to 
itself; it is from the start being without any relation to a “be- 
fore” which it would have to be as pure absence. Here again 
we find a quasi-succession; i.e., on the part of that which 
has appeared, there is a complete exteriority in relation to its 
nothingness. 

But in order for this absolute exteriority to be given in the 
form of the “there is,” there must be already a world; that 
is, ffie upsurge of a For-itself. The absolute exteriority of the 
In-itself in relation to the In-itself is responsible for the fact 
that even the very nothingness which is the quasi-before of 
the apparition or the quasi-after of the abolition can find no 
place in the plenitude of being. It is only within the unity 
of a world and on the ground of a world that there can ap- 
pear a this which was not or that there can be revealed that 
relation-of-absence-of-relation which is exteriority. The noth- 
nigness of being, which is priority in relation to an “ap- 



284 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


peared” which “was not,” can come only retrospectively to a 
world by a For-itself which is its own nothingness and its 
own priority. Thus the upsurge and the annihilation of the 
this are ambiguous phenomena; here again what comes to be- 
ing by the For-itself is a pure nothingness, the not-being-yet 
and the not-being-any-longer. The being which we are con- 
sidering is not the foundation of it, nor the world as a total- 
ity apprehended before or after. On the other hand, in so 
far as the upsurge is revealed in the world by a For-itself 
which is its own before and its own after, the apparition 
is given first as an adventure; we apprehend the this, which 
has appeared as being already there in the world, as its own 
absence inasmuch as we ourselves were already present to a 
world from which it was absent Thus the thing can arise 
from its own nothingness. Here, however, we are not deal- 
ing with a conceptual view of the mind but with an original 
structure of perception. The experiments of the Gestalt 
school show clearly that pure apparition is always grasped as 
a dynamic upsurge; the appearance comes on the run to 
being, on the ground of nothingness. 

At the same time we have here the origin of the “princi- 
ple of causality.” The ideal of causality is not the negation of 
the “appeared” as such, as someone like Meyerson would 
make it, nor is it the assigning of a permanent bond of ex- 
teriority between two phenomena. The first causality is the 
apprehension of the “appeared” before it appears as being 
already there in its own nothingness so as to prepare its ap- 
parition. Causality is simply the first apprehension of the 
temporality of the “appeared” as an ekstatic mode of being. 
But the adventurous character of the event, as the ekstatic 
constitution of the apparition, disintegrates in the very per- 
ception; the before and the after are fixed in its nothing- 
ness-in-itself, the “appeared” in its indifferent self-identity; 
the non-being of the “appeared” in that prior instant is re- 
vealed as an indifferent plenitude of the being existing at 
that instant; the relation of causality disintegrates into a pure 
relation of exteriority between the “thises” prior to the “ap- 
peared” and the “appeared” itself. Thus the ambiguity of 
apparition and of abolition comes from the fact that they are 
given, like the world, like space, like potentiality and instru- 
mentality, like universal time itself, in the form of totalities 
in perpetual disintegration. 

Such then is the past of the world — made of homogeneous 



'TRANSCENDENCE 


285 


instants connected one with another by a purely external rela- 
tion. By means of its Past, the For-itself founds itself in 
the In-itself. In the Past the For-itself, now become In-itself, 
is revealed as being in the midst of the world: it is; has lost 
its transcendence. And due to this fact its being is made past 
in time; there is no difference between the Past of the For- 
itself and the past of the world which was co-present with 
it except that the For-itself has to be its own past. Thus 
there is only one Past, which is the past of being or the 
objective Past in which I was. My past is past in the world, 
belonging to the totality of past being, which I am, which 
I flee. This means that there is a coincidence for one of the 
temporal dimensions between the ekstatic temporality which 
I have to be and the time of the world as a pure given noth- 
ingness. It is through the past that I belong to universal 
temporality; it is through the present and the future that I 
escape from it. 


B. The Present 

The Present of the For-itself is presence to being, and as 
such it is not. But it is a revelation of being. The being 
which appears to Presence is given as being in the Present. 
That is why the present is given paradoxically as not being 
at the moment when it is experienced and as being the unique 
measure of Being in so far as it is revealed as being what it 
is in the Present. Not that being does not extend beyond the 
present, but this superabundance of being can be grasped 
only through the instrument of apprehension which is the 
Past — that is, as that which is no longer. Thus this book on 
my table is in the present and it was (identical with itself) 
in the Past. Thus the Present is reveled through original 
temporality as universal being, and at the same time it is 
nothing — ^nothing more than being; it is a slipping-past 
alongside being, pure nothingness. 

The preceding observations would seem to indicate that 
nothing comes from being to the present except its being. 
But this would be to forget that being is revealed to the For- 
itself either as immobile or as in motion, and that the two 
notions of motion and rest are in a dialectical relation. Now 
motion can not be derived ontologically from the nature of 
the For-itself nor from its fundamental relation to the In- 



286 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

itself, nor from what we can discover originally in the 
phenomenon of Being. A world without motion would be 
conceivable. To be sure, we can not imagine the possibility 
of a world without change, except by virtue of a purely for- 
mal possibility, but change is not motion. Change is altera- 
tion of the quality of the this; it is produced, as we have 
seen, in a block by the upsurge or disintegration of a form. 
Motion, on the contrary, supposes the permanence of the 
quiddity. If a this were to be transferred from one place to 
another and during this transfer were to undergo a radical 
alteration of its being, this alteration would negate the mo- 
tion since there would no longer be anything which was in 
motion. Motion is pure change of place affecting a this which 
remains otherwise unaltered as is shown clearly enough by 
our assumption of the homogeneity of space. Since motion 
could not be deduced from any essential characteristic of 
existents in presence, it was denied by the Elcatic ontology; 
it compelled Descartes in his ontology to take refuge in the 
famous “snap of the finger.” Motion has the exact value of a 
fact; it participates wholly in the complete contingency of be- 
ing and must be accepted as a given. Of course we shall soon 
see that a For-itself is necessary in order for motion to exist; 
hence it is particularly difficult to designate exactly what in 
pure motion comes from being. But in any case there is no 
doubt that the For-itself here as elsewhere adds nothing to 
being. Here as elsewhere it is pure Nothing which provides 
the ground on which motion raises itself in relief. But while 
we are forbidden by the very nature of motion to deduce it, 
it is possible and even necessary for us to describe it. What 
then are we to conclude is the meaning of motion? 

It is believed that motion is a simple affection of being be- 
cause after the motion the moving body is discovered to be 
just as it was before. It has so often been posited as a prin- 
ciple ^ that transfer does not distort the figure transferred 
that it has appeared evident that motion is added to being 
without modifying it. It is certain, as we have seen, that the 
quiddity of the “this” remains unaltered. Nothing is more 
typical of this conception than the resistance which has been 
encountered by a theory like that of Fitzgerald concerning 
contraction,” or like Einstein’s concerning “the variations of 
mass,” because they seem particularly to attack what makes 
the being of the moving body. Hence evidently comes the 
principle of the relativity of motion, which is marvelously 



TRANSCENDENCE 


287 


agreeable if the latter is an external characteristic of being 
and if no intra-structural modification determines it. Motion 
becomes^ then a relation so external to the being of its setting 
that it amounts to saying that being is in motion and its en- 
vironment at rest or conversely that the environment is in 
motion and the being considered is at rest From this point 
of view motion appears neither as a being nor as a mode of 
being but as an entirely desubstantialized relation. 

But the fact that &e moving body is identical with itself 
at departure and at arrival — i.e., in file two states which en- 
compass motion — does not predetermine in any respect what 
it has been while it was in motion. It would amount to 
saying that the water which boils in an autoclave undergoes 
no transformation during the boiling, for the specious reason 
that it presents the same characteristics when it is cold at the 
start and when it is re-cooled. The fact that we can assign 
different successive positions to the moving body during its 
motion and that at each position it appears similar to itself 
should not deter us, for these positions define the space tra- 
versed and not motion itself. On the contrary, it is this mathe- 
matical tendency to treat the moving body as a being at rest 
that would change the length of a line without drawing it 
out of its state of rest; it is this tendency which is at the 
origin of the Eleatic paradoxes. 

Thus the affirmation that being remains unchanged in its 
being, whether it be at rest or in motion, should appear to 
us as a simple postulate which we ought not to accept uncriti- 
cally. In order to submit it to criticism let us return to the 
Eleatic arguments and in particular to the one concerning 
the arrow. The arrow, they tell us, when it passes by the posi- 
tion AB “is” there, exactly as if it were an arrow at rest, with 
the tip of its head on A and the tip of its tail on B. This ap- 
pears evident if we admit that motion is superimposed on 
being and that consequently nothing comes to decide wheth- 
er being is in motion or at rest. In a word, if motion is an 
accident of being, motion and rest are indistinguishable. The 
arguments which are usually opposed to the most famous of 
the Eleatic paradoxes, that of Achilles and the Tortoise, have 
no bearing here. What good is it to object that the Eleatics 
have reckoned on the infinite division of space without equal- 
ly taking into account that of time? The question here con- 
cerns neither position not the instant, but being. We ap- 
proach a correct conception of the problem when we reply to 



288 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


the Eleatics that they have considered not motion but the 
space which supports motion. But we are not limiting our- 
selves to pointing out the question without resolving it. What 
must be the being of the moving body in order for its quid- 
dity to remain unchanged while in its being the moving body 
is distinct from a being at rest? 

If we try to clarify our objections to Z^eno’s arguments, we 
establish that they originate in a certain naive conception of 
motion. We admit that the arrow “passes” at AB, but it does 
not seem to us that to pass a place is the equivalent of re- 
maining there — i.e., of being there. Yet in this view we are 
guilty of serious confusion, for we consider that the moving 
object only passes AB (i.e., it never is there) and at the 
same time we continue to take for granted that in itself it is. 
Consequently the arrow simultaneously would be in itself and 
would not be at AB. This is the origin of the Eleatic Para- 
dox: how could the arrow not be at AB since at AB it is? In 
other words in order to avoid the Eleatic paradox we must 
renounce the generally admitted postulate according to which 
being in motion preserves its being-in-itself. Merely to pass 
at 4^ is a being-of-passage. What does it mean to pass? It 
is simultaneously to be at a place and not to be there. At no 
moment can it be said that the being of the passage is here, 
without running the risk of abruptly stopping it there, but 
neither can it be said that it is not, or that it is not there, or 
that it is elsewhere. Its relation with the place is not a relation 
occupation. But we have seen earlier that the location of 
a “this” at rest was its relation of exteriority to the ground 
inasmuch as this relation can collapse into a multiplicity of 
external relations with other “thises” when the ground itself 
disinte^ates into a multiplicity of figures.'* The foundation of 
space is therefore the reciprocal exteriority which comes to 
bemg dirough the For-itself and whose origin is the fact that 
being is what it is. In a word it is being which defines its 
place by revealing itself to a For-itself as indifferent to other 
bemgs. This indifference is nothing but its very identity, its 
absence from ekstatic reality as it is apprehended by a For- 
itself which is already presence to other “thises.” 

By the very fact therefore that the this is what it is, it 
accuses a place, it is in a place— that is, it is put into rela- 
L For-itself with other thises as having no relation 
wit them. Space is the nothingness of relation apprehend- 

■* Chapter Three, Section II. 



TRANSCENDENCE 


289 


ed as relation by the being which is its own relation. The 
fact of passing by a place, instead of being there, can there- 
fore be interpreted only in terms of being. This means that 
since place is founded by being, being is no longer suffi- 
cient to found its place. It merely outlines it; its relations 
of exteriority with other “thises” can not be established by 
the For-itself because the latter must establish those relations 
in terms of a “this” which is. However these relations could 
not be annihilated because the being in terms of which they 
are established is not a pure nothingness. The very “now” in 
which they are established is already exterior to them; that 
is, simultaneously with their revelation, there are already re- 
vealed new relations of exteriority of which the “this” con- 
sidered is the foundation and which are externally related to 
the &st. But this continuous exteriority of spatial relations 
which define the place of being can find its foundation only 
in the fact that the this considered is exterior to itself. In 
fact to say that the this passes by a place means that it is al- 
ready no longer there when it is still there; that is, in rela- 
tion to itself it is not in an ekstatic relation of being but in 
a pure relation of exteriority. Thus there is “place” in so far 
as the “this” is revealed as exterior to other “thises.” And 
there is a passage at this place in so far as being is no longer 
caught up in this exteriority but on the contrary is already ex- 
terior to it. Thus motion is the being of a being which is ex- 
terior to itself. The only metaphysical question which is pos- 
ited omthe occasion of motion is that of exteriority to self. 
What should we understand by that? 

In motion being changes into nothing when it passes from 
A to B. This means that its quality, in so far as it repre- 
sents the being which is revealed as this to the For-itself, is 
not transformed into another quality. Motion is in no way 
similar to becoming; it does not change the essence of the 
quality; neither does it actualize the quality. The quality re- 
mains exactly what it is; but its mode of being is changed. 
This red ball which rolls on the billiard table does not cease 
to be red, but the ball is not this red which it is in the 
same way now as it was the red when at rest. The red remains 
suspended between abolition and permanence. In fact in so 
far as it is already at B, it is exterior to what it was at A and 
there is an annihilation of the red; but in so far as it redis-* 
covers itself at C, beyond B, it is exterior to that very annihi- 



290 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


lation. Thus through abolition it escapes being, and through 
being it escapes abolition. 

Therefore a category of “thises” is encountered in the 
world which have the peculiar property of never being with- 
out thereby becoming nothingness. The only relation which 
the For-itself can originally apprehend on these thises is the 
relation of exteriority to self. For since the exterior- 
ity is nothing, a being must exist which is to itself its own 
relation in order that there may be “exteriority to self.” In 
short it is impossible for us to define in the pure terms of the 
In-itself what is revealed to a For-itself as exteriority-to-self. 
That exteriority can be discovered only by a being which is 
already to itself over there what it is here — ^that is, a con- 
sciousness. This exteriority-to-self, which appears as a pure 
disorder of being — ^that is, as the impossibility which exists 
for certain “thises” simultaneously to be themselves and to 
be their own nothingness — ^this must be indicated by some- 
thing which exists as a nothing in the world; that is, as a 
substantiated nothing. Since exteriority-to-self is in no way 
ekstatic, the relation of the moving body to itself is a pure, 
relation of indifference and can be revealed only to a witness. 
It is an abolition which can not be completed and an appari- 
tion which can not be completed. This nothing which mea- 
sures and signifies exteriority-to-self is the trajectory, as the 
constitution of exteriority in the unity of a single being. The 
trajectory is the line which is described — that is, an abrupt 
appearance of synthetic unity in space, a counterfeit which 
collapses immediately into the infinite multiplicity of exte- 
riority. When the this is at rest, space is; when it is in mo- 
tion space is engendered or becomes. The trajectory never 
is, since it is nothing; it vanishes immediately into purely 
external relations between different places; that is, in simple 
exteriority of indifference or spatiality. Motion has no more 
of being; it is the least-being of a being which can neither 
arrive nor be abolished nor wholly be. Motion is the ^up- 
surge of the exteriority of indifference at the very heart of 
the in-itself. This pure vacillation of being is a contingent 
venture of being. The For-itself can apprehend it only across 
the temporal ekstasis and in an ekstatic permanent identifica- 
tion of the moving body with itself. This identification dpes 
not suppose any operation and in particular no “synthesis of 
recognition”; for the For-itself it is only the unity of ekstatic 
being of the Past with the Present. Thus the temporal identi- 



TRANSCENDENCE 


291 


fication of the moving body with itself across the constant 
positing of its own exteriority causes the trajectory to reveal 
itself — that is, to cause space to arise in the form of an 
evanescent becoming. By motion space is engendered in 
time; motion extends the line as traced from externality to 
self. The line vanishes at the same time as motion, and this 
phantom of the temporal unity of space is founded contin- 
uously in non-temporal space — ^that is, in the pure multiplic- 
ity of dispersion which is without becoming. 

The For-itself in the present is presence to being. But the 
eternal identity of the permanent does not allow apprehend- 
ing this presence as a reflection {reflet) on things since 
in permanence nothing comes to differentiate what is from 
what was. The present dimension of universal time would 
therefore be inapprehensible if there were no motion. It is 
motion which in the pure present determines universal time. 
First because universd time is revealed as present vacillation; 
already in the past it is no longer anything but an evanescent 
line, like the wake of a ship which fades away; in the future 
it is not at all, for it is unable to be its own project. It is like 
the steady progression of a lizard on the w^. Moreover 
its being has the inapprehensible ambiguity of the instant, 
for one could not say either that it is or that it is not; in ad- 
dition it no sooner appears than it is already surpassed and 
exterior to itself. 

Therefore universal time corresponds perfectly to the Pres- 
ent of the For-itself: the exteriority to self of the being which 
can neither be nor not be returns to the For-itself an image — 
projected on the level of the In-itself — of a being which 
has to be what it is not and to not-be what it is. The whole 
difference lies in that which separates exteriority-to-self — 
where being is not in order to be its own exteriority, but “is 
to-be,” rather, through the identification of an ekstatic wit- 
ness — ^from the pure temporalizing ekstasis where being has 
to be what it is not. The For-itself makes its present known 
to itself through that which moves; it is its own present in 
simultaneity with actual motion; it is motion which will be 
charged with realizing universal time, in so far as the For-it- 
self makes known to itself its own present through the present 
of the moving body. This realization will give importance 
to the reciprocal exteriority of instants since the present of 
the moving body is defined — because of the very nature 
of motion — as exteriority to its own past and exteriority 



292 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


to that exteriority. The infinite division of time is founded in 
that absolute exteriority. 


C. The Future 


The original future is the possibility of that presence which 
I have to be beyond the real to an in-itself which is beyond 
the real in-itself. My future involves as a future co-presence 
the outline of a future world, and as we have seen, it is this 
future world which is revealed to the For-itself which I will 
be; it is not the true possibilities of the For-itself, for only 
the reflective regard can know these. Since my possibles 
are the meaning of what I am and arise straightway as a be- 
yond the in-itself to which I am presence, the future of the 
in-itself which is revealed to my future is in direct, strict con- 
nection with the real to which I am presence. The future of 
^e in-itself is the present in-itself modified, for my future 
is nothing other than my possibilities of presence to an in-it- 
plf which I will have modified. Thus the future of the world 
is revealed^ to my future. It is made from the scale of possi- 
bilities which runs from simple permanence and the pure 
essence of the thing on up to potencies. As soon as I fix the 
es^nce of the thing, as soon as I apprehend it as table or 
mkwell, I am already there in the future: first because its 
essence can only be a co-presence to my further possibility of 
not-being-any-more-than-this-negation, and second because 
me permanence and the very instrumentality of the table or 
inkwell refer us to the future. We have suflSciently developed 
these observations in preceding sections so that we need 
^t dwell on them here. What we wish to point out is only 
^ at everything, from the moment of its appearance as an 
mstrumental-thing, immediately houses certain of its struc- 
tures and properties in the future. 

of the appearance of the world and of 
me ttuses there exists a universal future. Yet we have 
noted e^her that every future “state” of the world remains 
ange o it m the full reciprocal exteriority of indifference, 
ere are certain futures in the world which are defined by 
become autonomous probables, which are not 
P a ized but which are as probables, as fully constituted 
nows, with their content well determined but not yet real- 



TRANSCENDENCE 293 

ized. These futures belong to each “this” or collection of 
“thises,” but they are outside. 

What then is the universal future? We must view it as 
the abstract context of that hierarchy of equivalents which 
MG- the futures, a container of reciprocal exteriorities which 
is itself exteriority, a sum of in-itselfs which is itself in-it- 
seh. That is, whatever may be the probable which is to pre- 
vail, there is and there will be a future. But due to this very 
fact, that future, indifferent and external to the present and 
-composed of “nows,” each one indifferent to the others and 
reunited by the substantiated relation of before-after (in so 
far as this relation, emptied of its ekstatic character, has no 
longer anything but the meaning of an external negation) — 
this future is a series of empty containers reunited with one 
another in the unity of dispersion. In this sense the future 
sometimes appears as an urgency and a threat in so far as I 
strictly tie the future of a this to its present by the project of 
my own possibilities beyond the co-present. But sometimes 
this threat disintegrates into pure exteriority, and I no longer 
apprehend the future except under the aspect of a pure for- 
mal container, indifferent to what fills it and homogeneous 
with space, as a simple law of exteriority. And finally some- 
times the future is discovered as a nothingness in-itself, in- 
asmuch as it is pure dispersion beyond being. 

Thus the temporal dimensions, across which the non-tem- 
poral this is given to us with its very atemporality, assume 
new qualities when they appear on the object: being-in-itself, 
objectivity, the exteriority of indifference, absolute dispersion. 
Time, in so far as it is revealed to an ekstatic temporality 
which temporalizes itself, is everywhere a self-transcendence 
and a referring of the before to the after and of the 
after to the before. But this sclf-transcendencc, in so far 
as it causes itselJf to be apprehended on the in-itself, does not 
have to be it; it is made-to-be in it. The cohesion of Time is 
a pure phantom, the objective reflection (reflet) of the ekstat- 
ic project of the For-itself toward itself and &e cohesion in 
motion of human Reality. But this cohesion has no raison 
d'Stre. If Time is considered by itself, it immediately dis- 
solves into an absolute multiplicity of instants which consid- 
ered separately lose all temporal nature and are reduced 
purely and simply to the total atemporality of the this. Thus 
Time is pure nothingness in-itself, which can seem to have a 
being only by the very act in which the For-itself overleaps it 



294 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

in order to utilize it This being, however, is that of a particu- 
lar figure which is raised on the undifferentiated ground of 
time and which we call the lapse of time. In fact our first 
apprehension of objective time is practical: it is while being 
my possibilities beyond co-present being that I discover ob- 
jective time as the worldly correlate of nothingness which 
separates me from my possible. From this point of view time 
appears as a finite, organized form in the heart of an indef- 
inite dispersion. The lapse of time is the result of a compres- 
sion of time at the heart of an absolute decompression, and it 
is the project of ourselves toward our possibilities which 
realizes the compression. This compression of time is cer- 
tainly a form of dispersion and of separation, for it expresses 
in the world the distance which separates me from myself. 
But on the other hand, since I project myself toward a possi- 
ble only across an organized series of dependent possibles 

which are what I have to be in order to and since 

their non-thematic and non-positional revelation is given in 
the non-positional revelation of the major possible toward 
which I project myself, time is revealed to me as an objective, 
temporal form, as an organized echeloning of probabilities. 
This objective form or lapse is like the trajectory of my act 
Thus time appears through trajectories. But just as spa- 
tial trajectories decompose and collapse into pure static spa- 
tiality, so the temporal trajectory collapses as soon as it is not 
simply lived as that which objectively implies our expectation 
of ourselves. In fact the probables which are revealed to me 
tend naturally to be isolated as in-itself probables and to 
occupy a strictly separated fraction of objective time. Then 
the lapse of time disappears, and time is revealed as the shim- 
mer of nothingness on the surface of a strictly atemporal being. 

V. KNOWLEDGE 

Thk rapid outline of the revelation of the world to the 
For-itself enables us now to form certain conclusions. We 
shall grant to idealism that the being of the For-itself is 
^owledge of being, but we must add that this knowledge 
has being. The identity of the being of the For-itself and 
of knowledge does not come from the fact that knowledge is 
the measure of being but from the fact that the For-itself 



■ TRANSCENDENCE 


295 


makes known to itself what it is, through the in-itself; 
that is, from the fact that in its being it is a relation to be- 
ing. Knowledge is nothing other than the presence of being 
to the For-itself, and the For-itself is only the nothing which 
realizes that presence. Thus knowledge is by nature ekstatic 
being, ^d because of that fact it is confused with the ekstat- 
ic being of the For-itself. The For-itself does not exist in 
order subsequently to know; neither can we say that it exists 
only in so far as it knows or is known, for this would be to 
make being vanish into an infinity regulated by particular 
bits of knowledge. Knowing is an absolute and primitive 
event; it is the absolute upsurge of the For-itself in the midst 
of being and beyond being, in terms of the being which it 
is not and as the negation of that being and a self-nihila- 
tion. In a word, by a radical reversal of the idealist position, 
knowledge is reabsorbed in being. It is neither an attribute 
nor a function nor an accident of being; but there is only 
being. From this point of view it appears necessary to aban- 
don the idealist position entirely, and in particular it becomes 
possible to hold that the relation of the For-itself to the 
In-itself is a fundamental ontological relation. At the end of 
this book we shall even be able to consider this articulation 
of the For-itself in relation to the In-itself as the perpetu- 
ally moving outline of a quasi-totality which we can call 
Being. From the point of view of this totality the upsurge 
of the For-itself is not only the absolute event for the For- 
itself; it is also something which happens to the In-itself, 
the only possible adventure of the In-itself. In fact every- 
thing happens as if the For-itself by its very nihilation con- 
stituted itself as “consciousness of that is, as if by its 

very transcendence it escaped that law of the In-itself in 
which the affirmation is pasted over by the afiirmed. The For- 
itself by its self-negation becomes the affirmation of the In- 
itself. The intentional affirmation is like the reverse of the 
internal negation; there can be affirmation only by a being 
which is its own nothingness and of a being which is not 
the affirming being. But then in the quasi-totality of Being, 
affirmation happens to the In-itself; it is the adventure of the 
In-itself to be affirmed. This affirmation which could not be 
effected as the affirmation of self by the In-itself without 
destroying its being-in-itself, happens to the In-itself as the 
affirmation is realized by the For-itself. The affirmation is like 
a passive ekstasis of the In-itself which leaves the in-itself 



296 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

unchanged yet which is achieved in the in-itself and from 
the standpoint of the in-itself. All this happens as if the For- 
itself had a Passion to lose itself in order that the afl^mation 
“world” might come to the In-itself. Of course this afl5rma- 
tion exists only for the For-itself; it is the For-itself itseh- 
and disappears with it. But it is not in the For-itself, for it 
is an ekstasis. If the For-itself is one of its terms (the affirm- 
ing), then the other term, the In-itself, is really present in 
it. The world which I discover exists outside on being. 

To realism, on the other hand, we shall grant that it is 
being which is present to consciousness in knowledge and 
that the For-itself adds nothing to the In-itself except the 
very fact that there is In-itself; that is, the affirmative nega- 
tion. Indeed we have undertaken the task of showing that 
the world and the instrumental-thing, space and quantity, 
and universal time are all pure hypostasized nothingnesses 
which in no way modify the pure being which is revealed 
through them. In this sense everything is given, everything 
is present to me without distance and in its complete reality. 
Nothing of what I see comes from me; there is nothing out- 
side what I see or what I could see. Being is everywhere - 
around me; it seems that I can touch it, grasp it; representa- 
tion, as a psychic event, is a pure invention of philosophers. 
But from this being which "invests me” on every side and 
from which nothing separates me, I am separated precisely 
by nothing; and this nothing because it is nothingness is im- 
passable. “There is” being because I am the negation of being, 
and worldliness, spatiality, quantity, instrumentality, tempo- 
rality — all come into being only because I am the negation of 
being. T^ese add nothing to being but are the pure, nihilat- 
ed conditions of the “there is”; they only cause the “there 
is” to be realized. But these conditions which are nothing 
septate me more radically from being than prismatic dis- 
tortions, across which I might still hope to discover being. 
To say that there is being is nothing, and yet it is to effect 
a total metamorphosis — since there is being only for a For- 
itself. It^ is not in its own quality that being is relative to 
the For-itself, nor in its being, and thereby we escape from 
Kantian relativism. Being is relative to the for-itself in its 
^ing there” since the For-itself in its internal negation 
amms what can not be affirmed, knows being such as it is 
when, ffie “such as^ it is” can not belong to being. In this 
sense the For-itself is immediate presence to being, and yet at 



TRANSCENDENCE 


297 


the same time it slips in as an infinite distance between itself 
and being. This is because knowing has for its ideal being- 
what-one-knows and for its original stnictufe not-being-what- 
is-known. Worldliness, spatiality, etc., only cause this not- 
being to be expressed. Thus I rediscover myself everywhere 
between myself and being as the nothing wlfich is not being. 

The world is human. We can see the very particular posi- 
tion of consciousness:' being is everywhere, opposite me, 
around me; it weighs down on me, it besieges me, and I am 
perpetually referred from being to being; that table which 
is there is being and nothing more; that rock, that tree, that 
landscape — ^being and nothing else. I want to grasp this 
being and I no longer find anything but myself. This is be- 
cause knowledge, intermediate between being and non-being, 
refers me to absolute being if I want to make knowledge sub- 
jective and refers me to myself when I think to grasp the 
absolute. The very meaning of knowledge is what it is not 
and is not what it is; for in order to know being such as it 
is, it would be necessary to be that being. But there is this 
“such as it is” only because I am not the being which I 
know; and if I should become it, then the “such as it is” 
would vanish and could no longer even be thought. We are 
not dealing here either with scepticism — ^which supposes 
precisely that the such as it is belongs to being — or with 
relativism. Knowledge puts us in the presence of the absolute, 
and there is a truth of knowledge. But this truth, although 
releasing to us nothing more and nothing less than the ab- 
solute, remains strictly human. 

Perhaps some may be surprised that we have treated the 
problem of knowing without raising the question of the 
body and the senses or even once referring to it. It is not my 
purpose to misunderstand or to ignore the role of the body. - 
But what is important above all else, in ontology as else- 
where, is to observe strict order in discussion. Now the body, 
whatever may be its function, appears first as the known. 
We can not therefore refer knowledge back to it or discuss 
It before we have defined knowing, nor can we derive know- 
Hig in its fundamental structure from the body in any way or 
manner whatsoever. Furthermore the body — our body — has 
its peculiar characteristic the fact that it is essentially 
mat which is known by the Other, What I know is the 
body of another, and the essential facts which I know con- 
cerning my own body come from the way in which others 



298 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


see it. Thus the nature of my body refers me to the exis- 
tence of others and to my being-for-others. I discover with 
it for human reality another mode of existence as fundamen- 
tal as being-for-itself, and this I shall call being-for-others. 
If I want to describe in an exhaustive manner the relation of 
man to being, I must now attempt the study of this new 
structure of my being — ^the For-others. Within one and the 
same upsurge &e being of human reality must be for-itself- 
for-others. 



part THRER 










^adstetvce 


o£ 


1. 




p^lOl 


cealW “ iot o* .„ teaW.'®^ 




“^atiA8 *i>\sVe3tA^f tViat *^ ,1 -9^© '^‘^vpttisevv*^ % wt)© ®‘’ 




**'*'ft>*'6 


onto\o^ 


to _.,r.et 11 _^^ot-tJV©* 



laod© -^^r'vfe^av© ^ ciisciovjs ^ 


«\ seu-r" . „ p-«ai 
It is 




1» 


of 80^® 

-f /I 


am- 


it is a''^''" sq a Ota a»^ , .sna * ot my -, 

teutiooaV^^ is "^^’^tiaxa^® axi 

W stoioe ^ .„ comp'®?- *? sba®® ® 

-^ss^rs^-r:; 


app©H'J 


302 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


phenomenon of reflection. In fact no matter what results one 
can obtain in solitude by the religious practice of shame, it is 
in its primary structure shame before somebody. I have just 
made an awkward or vulgar gesture. This gesture clings to 
me; I neither judge it nor blame it. I simply live it. I realize 
it in the mode of for-itself. But now suddenly I raise my 
head. Somebody was there and has seen me. Suddenly I realize 
the vulgarity of my gesture, and I am ashamed. It is certain 
that my shame is not reflective, for the presence of another in 
my consciousness, even as a catalyst, is incompatible with the 
reflective attitude; in the field of my reflection I can never 
meet with anything but the consciousness which is mine. But 


the Other is the indispensable mediator between myself and 
me. I am ashamed of myself as I appear to the Other. 

^ By the mere appearance of the Other, I am put in the posi- 
tion of passing judgment on myself as on an object, for it is 
as an object that I appear to the Other. Yet this object which 
has appeared to the Other is not an empty image in the mind 
of another. Such an image, in fact, would be imputable wholly 
to the Other and so could not “touch” me. I could feel irrita- 
tion, or anger before it as before a bad portrait of myself 
which gives to my expression an ugliness or baseness which 
I do not have, but I could not be touched to the quick. 
Shame is by nature recognition. I recognize that I am as the 
Other sees me. There is however no question of a com- 
I^rison between what I am for myself and what I am for 
the Other as if I found in myself, in the mode of being of the 
For-itself, an equivalent of what I am for the Other. In the first 
place this comparison is not encountered in us as the re- 
^ concrete psychic operation. Shame is an immediate 
shudder which runs through me from head to foot wthout 
any mscimsive preparation. In addition the comparison is im- 
possible; I am unable to bring about any relation between what 
am m &e mtunacy of the For-Itself, without distance, with- 

and this unjustifiable being-in- 
t 1,1 ^ Other. There is no standard here, no 

a e o coirelation. Moreover the very notion of vulgarity 
m^ les an mter-monad relation. Nobody can be vulgar all 


revealed to me what I was; 
of being which can sup- 
befnrp Cations. This being was not in me potentially 

e appearance of the Other, for it could not have 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


303 


found any place in the For-itself. Even if some power had 
been pleased to endow me with a body wholly constituted 
before it should be for-others, still my vulgarity and my awk- 
wardness could not lodge there potentially; for they are mean- 
ings and as such they surpass the body and at the same 
time refer to'a witness capable of understanding them and to 
the totality of my human reality. But this new being which 
appears for the other does not reside in the Other; I am re- 
sponsible for it as is shown very well by the education 
system which consists in making children ashamed of what 
they are. 

Thus shame is shame of oneself before the Other; these 
two structures are inseparable. But at the same time I need the 
Other in order to realize fully all the structures of my being. 
The For-itself refers to the For-others. Therefore if we wish 
to grasp in its totality the relation of man’s being to being-in- 
itself, we can not be satisfied with the descriptions outlined 
in the earlier chapters of this work. We must answer two far 
more formidable questions: first that of the existence of the 
Other, then that of the relation of my being to the being of 
the Other. 


n. THE REEF OF SOLIPSISM 

It is strange that the problem of Others has never truly dis- 
turbed the realists. To the extent that the realist takes every- 
tl^g as given, doubtless it seems to him that the Other is 
given. In the midst of the real what is more real than the 
Other? The Other is a thinking substance of the same 
essence as I am, a substance which will not disappear into 
primary and secondary qualities, and whose essential struc- 
ture! fimd in myself. Yet for all that realism attempts to 
account for knowledge by an action of the world upon the 
jinking substance, it has not been concerned with establish- 
ing an immediate reciprocal action of thinking substances upon 
each other. It is through the mediacy of the world that 
diey communicate. My body as a thing in the world 
and the Other’s body are the necessary intermediaries between 
the Other’s consciousness and mine. The Other’s soul is 
therefore separated from mine by all the distance which sep- 
^ates first my soul from my body, then my body from the 
Other’s body, and finally the Other’s body from his soul. 



304 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


And if it is as yet not certain that the relation of the For-itself 
to the body is an external relation (we shall have to deal with 
this problem later), at least it is evident that the relation 
of my body to the Other’s body is a relation of pure, indiffer- 
ent exteriority. If the souls are separated by their bodies, they 
are distinct as this inkwell is distinct from this book; that is, 
we can not conceive of the immediate presence of the one 
in the other. And even if we admit that my soul can be imme- 
diately present in the Other’s body, I still have to overcome 
all the density of a body before I touch his soul. Therefore 
if realism bases its certitude upon the presence “in per- 
son” of the spatial-temporal thing in my consciousness, it can 
not lay claim to the same evidence for the reality of the 
Other’s souk since by this very admission, the Other’s soul 
does not give itself “in person” to mine. It is an absence, a 
meaning; the body points to it without delivering it. In short, 
in a philosophy based on intuition, there is provided no in- 
tuition of the soul of the Other. But if we are not to make a 
mere play on words, this means that realism provides no place 
for the mtuition of the Other. It would be of no use to say 
that at least the Other’s body is given to us and that this body 
is a certain presence of the Other or of a part of the Other. It 
is true that the body belongs to the totality which we call 
“human reality” as one of its structures. But to be exact the 
body is the body of a man only in so far as it exists in the 
indissoluble unity of this totality, just as the organ is a living 
organ only in the totality of the organism. Realism in taking 
this position and presenting us with a body not enveloped in 
human totality but apart, like a stone or a tree or a piece of 
wax, has killed the body as surely as the physiologist who with 
his scalpel separates a piece of flesh from the totality of the 
living being. It is not the Other's body which is present to the 
realist intuition but a body, a body which doubtless has partic- 
ular aspects and a particular exts but which belongs neverthe- 
less^ to the great class of bodies. If it is true that for a 
spiritual realism, the soul is easier to know than the body, still 
the body will be easier to know than the Other’s soul. 

To tell the truth, the realist is not much concerned with 
this problem; that is because he takes the existence of others 
as certain. This is why the realistic and positivistic psychology 
century, taking for granted the existence of 
my fellow-man, ^ occupied itself exclusively with establishing 

- Ways by which I know this existence and read upon the 



THE EXISTENCE OF -OTHERS 


305 


body the nuances of a consciousness which is strange to me. 
The body, it wUl be said, is an object whose demands 
a particular interpretation.. The hypothesis which gives the 
best account of its behavior is that of a consciousness which 
is analogous to my own consciousness and whose various emo- 
tions the body reflects. It remains to explain how we arrive 
at this hypothesis. We will be told at one time that it is by 
analogy with what I know of myself and again that it is ex- 
perience which teaches us, for example, to interpret the sud- 
den reddening of a face as the forewarning of blows and angry 
cries. It will be freely admitted that this procedure can only 
give us a probable knowledge. It remains always possible^ that 
the Other is only a body. If animals are machines, why 
shouldn’t the man whom I see pass in the street be one? What 
I apprehend on this face is nothing but the elffect of certain 
muscular contractions, and they in turn are only the effect 
of a nervous impulse of which I know the course. Why 
not reduce the ensemble of these reactions to simple or con- 
ditioned reflexes? But the majority of psychologists remain 
convinced of the existence of the Other as a total reality of 
the same structure as their own. For them the existence of 
others is certain, and the knowledge which we have of them is 
probable. We can see here the sophistry of realism. Actually 
we ought to reverse the terms of this proposition and recog- 
nize that if the Other is accessible to us only by means of the 
knowledge which we have of him, and if this knowledge is 
only conjectural, then the existence of the Other is only con- 
jectural, and it is the role of critical reflection to determine its 
exact degree of probability. Thus by a curious reversal, the 
realist, because he has posited the reality of the external world, 
is forced to return to idealism when he confronts the existence 
of others. If the body is a real object really acting on thinking 
substance, the Other becomes a pure representation, whose 
esse is a simple percipi; that is, one whose existence is 
measured by the knowledge which we have of it. The more 
recent theories of Einfiihlungy of sympathy, and of forms 
serve only to perfect the description of our ways of making 
the Other present, but they do not put the debate on its true 
ground: that is, the Other is first perceived or he appears in 
experience as a particular form before all habitude; and in 
the absence of any analogous inference the fact remains that 
the object, signifying and perceived, the expressive form re- 

*Tr. The French reads probable, which I feel certain must be an error. 



306 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


fers purely and simply to a human totality whose existence 
remains purely and simply conjectural. 

If realism thus refers us to idealism, is it not advisable to 
adopt immediately the perspective of critical idealism? Since 
the Other is “my representation,” is it not better to question 
this representation at the heart of a system which reduces the 
ensemble of objects to a connected grouping of representa- 
tions and which measures all existence by the knowledge 
which I have of it? 


We shall, however, find little help in the Kantians. In 
fact they, preoccupied with establishing the universal laws of 
subjectivity which are the same for all, never dealt with the 
question of persons. The subject is only the common essence 
of these persons; it would no more allow us to determine the 
multiplicity of persons than the essence of man, in Spinoza’s 
system, permits one to determine that of concrete men. At 
&st then it seems that Kant placed the problem of others 


among those matters which were not within the province of 
his critique. However let us look more closely. The Other as 
such is given in our experience; he is an object and a particu- 
lar object. Kant adopted the point of view of the pure subject 
in order to determine the conditions of possibility not only for 
an object in general but for the various categories of objects: 
the physical object, the mathematical object, the beautiful or 
ugly object, and the one which presents teleological character- 
istics. In this connection Kant has been criticized for 
lacunas in his work, and some— following Dilthey, for ex- 
ample ^have wished to establish the conditions of possi- 
bility for the historical object — i.e., to attempt a critique of 
historical reason. Similarly if it is true that the Other repre- 
sents a particular t5^e of object which is discovered to our 
experience, then it is necessary even within the perspective 
OT a rigorous^ Kantianism to ask how the Imowledge of the 
Other is possible; that is, to establish the conditions of possi- 
bility for the experience involving others. 

ArtuaJly it would be completely erroneous to put the 
probl^ of the Other and that of noumenal realities on the 
same footmg. Of course, if certain “Others” exist and if they 
^e similar to me, the question of their intelligible existence 
an e posed for them as that of my noumenal existence 
w pose for me; to be sure also, the same reply will be valid 

thnn noumenal existence can only be 

thought, not conceived. But when I aim at the Other in my 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


307 


daily experience, it is by no means a noumenal reality that I 
am aiming at; neither do I apprehend or aim at my intelligible 
reality when I obtain knowledge of my emotions or of my 
empirical thoughts. The Other is a phenomenon which refers 
to other phenomena — ^to a phenomenomof-anger which the 
Other feels toward me, to a series of thoughts which appear to 
him as phenomena of his inner sense. What I aim at in the 
Other is nothing more than what I find in myself. But these 
phenomena are radically distinct from all other phenomena. 

In the first place the appearance of the Other in my ex- 
perience is manifested by the presence of organized forms 
such as gestures and expression, acts and conducts. These 
organized forms refer to an organizing unity which on princi- 
ple is located outside of our experience. The Other’s anger, in 
so far as it appears to his inner sense and is by nature refused 
to my apperception, gives the meaning and is perhaps the 
cause of the series of phenomena which I apprehend in my 
experience under the name of expression or gestures. Tlie 
Other ^ the sjmthetic unity of his experiences and as both 
will and passion comes to organize my experience. It is not a 
question of the pure and simple action of an unknowable 
noumenon upon my sensibility but of the constitution of con- 
nected groups of phenomena within the field of my ex- 
perience by a being who is not me. These phenomena, un- 
like all others, do not refer to possible experiences but to 
experiences which on principle are outside my experience and 
belong to a system which is inaccessible to me. But on the 
other hand, the condition of possibility for all experience is 
that the subject organize his impressions into a connected 
system. Thus we find in things “only what we have put into 
them.” The Other therefore can not without contradiction 
appear to us as organizing our experience; there would be in 
this an over-determination of the phenomenon. 

Can we make use of causality here? This question is well 
designed to show the ambiguous character of the Other in a 
Kantian philosophy. Causality could in fact link only phe- 
nomena to each oAer. But to be exact, the anger which the 
Other feels is one phenomenon, and the furious expression 
which I perceive is another and different phenomenon. Can 
there be a causal connection between them? This would con- 
forra to their phenomenal nature, and in this sense I am not 
prevented from considering the redness of Paul’s face as the 
effect of his anger; this is a part of my ordinary afiSxmation. 



308 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

But on the other hand, causality has meaning only if it links 
the phenomena of one and the same experience and contrib- 
utes to constituting that experience. Can it serve as a bridge 
between two experiences which are radically separated? Here 
we must note that by using causality in this capacity I shall 
make it lose its nature as an ideal unification of empirical 
appearances. Kantian causality is a unification of the moments 
of my time in the form of irreversibility. Now are we to admit 
that it will unify my time with that of the Other? What 
temporal relation is to be established between the decision to 
express himself, which is a phenomenon appearing in the 
woof of the Ofiier’s experience, and the expression which is 
a phenomenon of my experience? Is it simultaneity? Succes- 
sion? But how can an instant of my time be in a relation of 
simultaneity or of succession with an instant in the Other’s 
time? Even if a pre-established harmony (which is, however, 
incomprehensible in a Kantian perspective) could effect a 
correspondence of instant with instant in the two times con- 
sidered, they would still remain two times unrelated since for 
each of them the unifying synthesis of moments is an act of 
the subject The universality of time with Kant is only the 
universality of a concept; it means only that each temporality 
must possess a definite structure, that the conditions of possi- 
bility for a temporal experience are valid for all temporalities. 
But this identity of temporal essence does not prevent the in- 
communicable diversity of times any more than the identity of 
the essence of man prevents the incommunicable diversity of 
human consciousness. Thus since a relation between conscious- 
nesses is by nature unthinkable, the concept of the Other can 
not constitute our experience; it must be placed along with 
teleological concepts among the regulative concepts. The 
Other therefore belongs to the category of “as if.” The Other 
is an a priori h5^othesis with no justification save the unity 
which it permits to operate in our experience, an hypothesis 
which can not be thought without contradiction. It is possi- 
ble, so far as the pure exercise of knowledge is concerned, 
of the action of an intelligible reality on our sen- 
si mty, but it is not even thinkable that a phenomenon whose 
reality is strictly relative to its appearance in the Other’s ex- 
perience should really act on a phenomenon of my experience. 

admitted that the action of an intelligible reality 
simultaneously on my experience and on 
that of the Other (in the sense that the intelligible reality 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


309 


would affect the Other to the same degree that it would af- 
fect me), it would still remain radically impossible to establish 
or even to postulate a parallelism and a table of correlation 
between two systems which are spontaneously constituted.^ 
But on the other hand does the quality of a regulative concept 
really fit the concept of the Other? It is not a question of 
establishing a stronger unity between the phenomena of my 
experience in the manner of a purely formal concept which 
would only allow the discovery of details in the objects which 
appear to me. It is not a question of a kind of a priori 
hypothesis not extending beyond the field of my experience 
but inspiring new investigation within the very limits of this 
field. The perception of the Other-as-object refers to a 
coherent system of representations, and this system is 
not mine. This means that in my experience the Other is 
not a phenomenon which refers to my experience but that on 
principle he refers himself to phenomena located outside of all 
experience which is possible for me. Of course the concept of 
the Other allows discoveries and predictions within the heart 
of my system of representations, a contraction in the web of 
phenomena: thanks to the hypothesis of Others I can antici- 
pate this gesture as coming from that expression. But this con- 
cept is not presented as being like those scientific notions 
(imaginary ones, for example) or like instruments which in- 
tervene in the course of a physical calculation, which are 
not presented in the empirical statement of the problem and 
which are eliminated from the results. The concept of the 
Other is not purely instrumental. Far from the concepts exist- 
ing in order to serve to unify phenomena, the truth is that 
certain categories of phenomena seem to exist only for the 
concept of the Other. 

*^6 existence of a system of meanings and experiences 
radically distinct from my own is the fixed skeletal framework 
located by diverse series of phenomena in their very flow. 
This framework, which on principle is external to my ex- 
perience, is gradually filled in. We can never apprehend the 
relation of that Other to me and he is never given, but gradu- 
we constitute him as a concrete object. He is not the in- 
strument which serves to predict an event in my experience. 

Even if we agreed to adopt the Kantian metaphysics of nature and 
6 catalogue of principles 'which Kant has drawn up, it would be possible 
0 conceive of radically different types of physics based on these principles. 



310 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

but there are events in my experience which serve to consti- 
tute the Other qua Other; that is, as a system of representa- 
tions out of reach, as a concrete and knowable object What I 
constantly aim at across my experiences are the Other’s feel- 
ings, the Other’s ideas, the Other’s volitions, the Other’s char- 
acter. This is because the Other is not only the one whom I 
see but the one who sees me. I aim at the Other in so far 
as he is a connected system of experiences out of reach in 
which I figure as one object among others. But to the extent 
that I strive to determine the concrete nature of this system 
of representations and the place which I occupy there as an 
object, I radically transcend the field of my experience. I am 
concerned with a series of phenomena which on principle can 
never be accessible to my intuition, and consequently I exceed 
the lawful limits of my knowledge. I seek to bind together 
experiences which will never be my experiences, and conse- 
quently this work of construction and unification can 
in no way serve for the unification of my own experience. To 
the extent that the Other is an absence he escapes nature. 
Therefore the Other can not be described as a regulative con- 
cept. Of course Ideas like the World, for example, also on 
principle escape my experience, but at least they are re- 
ferred back to it and have meaning only through it The 
Other, on the contrary, is presented in a certain sense as the 
radical negation of my experience, since he is the one for 
whom I am not subject but object Therefore as the subject 
of knowledge I strive to determine as object the subject who 
denies my character as subject and who himself determines 
me as object 

Thus the Other within the perspective of idealism can 
be considered neither as a constitutive concept nor as a regula- 
tive concept of my knowledge. He is conceived as real, and 
yet I can not conceive of his real relation to me. I construct 
hm as object and yet he is never released by, intuition. I posit 
him as subject, and yet it is as the object of my thoughts that 
I consider him. There remain then only two solutions for the 
idealist: either to get rid of the concept of the Other com- 
pletely and prove that he is useless to the constitution of my 
experience, or to affirm the real existence of the Other — ^that 
IS, to posit a real, extra-empirical communication between con- 
sciousnesses. 

. solution is known by the name of solipsism. Yet 

It It IS formulated in conformity with its denomination as the 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


311 


affirmation of my ontological solitude, it is a pure metaphysi- 
cal hypothesis, perfectly unjustified and gratuitous; for it 
amounts to saying that outside of me nothing exists and so it 
goes beyond Ae limits of the field of my experience. But if 
it is presented more modestly as a refusd to leave the solid 
ground of experience and as a positive attempt not to make 
use of the concept of the Other, then it is perfectly logical; 
it remains on the level of critical positivism, and although it is 
opposed to the deepest inclinations of our being, it derives its 
justification from the contradictions of the notion of Others 
considered in the idealist perspective. A psychology which 
wants to be exact and objective, like the “behaviorism” of 
Watson, is really only solipsism as a working hypothesis. It 
will not try to deny within the field of my experience the 
presence of objects, which we shall call “psychic beings” 
but will merely practice a sort of kiroxn^ respect to the 
existence of systems of representations organized by a subject 
and located outside my experience. 

Confronted with this solution, Kant and the majority of 
post-Kantiahs continue to affirm the existence of the Other. 
But they can refer only to common sense or to our deep- 
rooted tendencies to justify their affirmation. We know that 
Schopenhauer speaks of the solipsist as “a madman shut up 
in an impregnable blockhouse.” What a confession of im- 
potehcel It is -in fact by this position with regard to the exis- 
tence of the Other that we suddenly explode the structure of 
idealism and fall back into a metaphysical realism. First of all 
by positing a plurality of closed systems which can com- 
municate only through the outside, we implicitly re-establish 
the notion of substance. Of course these systems are non-sub- 
stantial since they are systems of representation. But their 
reciprocal exteriority is an exteriority in itself; it is without 
being known; we do mot even apprehend the effects with any 
^rtainty since the solipsist hypothesis remains always possible. 
We are not limited to positing this nothingness in-itself as an 
absolute fact; indeed it is not relative to our knowledge of 
Other; rather it conditions our knowledge of the Other, 
inerefore even if consciousnesses are only pure conceptual 
collections of phenbmena, even if the rule of their existence 
IS the percipere and the percipi, the fact still remains that the 
tptutiplicity of these relational systems is a multiplicity in- 
itself and that it immediately transforms them each one into a 

*Tr. Correctioii for cttoxv ^ 


312 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

system in-itself. In addition, if I posit the notion that my 
experience of the Other’s anger has as a correlate in another 
system a subjective experience of anger, I reinstate the system 
of the true image which Kant was especially concerned to get 
rid of. To be sure, we are dealing with a relation of agreement 
between the two phenomena — the anger perceived in the ges- 
tures and signs and the anger apprehended as a phenome- 
nal reality of inner sense — and not with a relation between a 
phenomenon and a thing-in-itself. But the fact remains that 
the criterion of truth here is the conformity of thought to its 
object, not the agreement of representations with each other. 
In fact precisely because all recourse to the noumenon is here 
removed, the phenomenon of the anger felt is to that of the 
anger established as the objective real is to- its image. The 
problem is indeed one of adequate representation since there 
is a real and a mode of apprehension of this real. If we were 
dealing with the problem of my own anger, I could in fact 
consider its subjective manifestations and its physiological ob- 
jectively discernible manifestations as two series of the effects 
of a single cause without having one of the series represent 
the truth of the anger or its reality and the other only its effect 
or its image. But if one of the series of the phenomena resides 
in the Other and the other series in me, then the one series 
functions as the reality of the other series, and the realist 
scheme of truth is the only one which can be applied here. 

Thus we abandoned the realist solution of the problem 
only because it necessarily resulted in idealism; we deliberately 
placed ourselves within the idealist perspective and thereby 
gained nothing because, conversely, to the extent that 
idealism rejects the solipsistic hypothesis, it results in a dog- 
matic and totally unjustified realism. Let us' see if we can 
understand this abrupt inversion of doctrines and if we can 
derive from this paradox some information which will facil- 
itate a correct position with respect to the question. 

At ^e origin of the problem of the existence of others, 
there is a fundamental 'presupposition: others are the Other, 
that is &e self which is not myself. Therefore we grasp here 
a negation as the constitutive structure of the being-of-others. 
The presupposition common to both idealism and realism is 
the constituting negation is an external negation. The 
- is ^ot me and the one who I am not. 

not indicates a nothingness as a given element of sep- 
aration between the Other and myself. Between the Other and 



313 


THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 

myself there is a nothingness of separation. This nothing- 
ness does not derive its origin from myself nor from the 
Other, nor is it a reciprocal relation between, the Other and 
myself. On the contrary, as a primary absence of relation, it 
is originally the foundation of all relation between the Other . 
and me. This is because the Other appears to me empirically^ 
on the occasion of the perception of a body, and this body is 
an in-itself external to my body; the type of relation which 
unites and separates these two bodies is a spatial relation, the 
relation of things which have no relation among themselves, 
pine exteriority in so far as it is given. The realist who be- 
lieves that he apprehends the Other through his body con- 
siders therefore that he is separated from the Other as one 
body from another body, which means that the ontological 
meaning of the negation contained in the judgment, “I am 
not Paul,” is of the same type as that of the negation con- 
tained in the judgment, “The table is not the chair.” Thus 
since the separation of consciousnesses is attributable to the 
bodies, there .is a sort of original space between diverse con- 
sciousnesses; that is, precisely a given nothingness, an absolute 
distance passively experienced. Idealism, to be sure, reduces 
my body and the Other’s body to objective systems of repre- 
sentation. For Schopenhauer my body is nothing but the “im- 
mediate object,” But this view does not thereby suppress the 
absolute distance between consciousnesses. A total system 
of ' representations — i.e., each monad — can be limited only by 
itself and so , can not enter into relation with what is not it 
The knowing subject can neither limit another subject nor 
cause itself to be limited by another subject. It is isolated by 
its positive plenitude, and consequently tietween itself and 
another equally isolated system there is preserved a spatial 
separation as the very type of exteriority. Thus it is still space 
which implicitly separates my consciousness from the Other’s. 
Even so it must be added that the idealist without being 
Ware of it is resorting to a “third man” in order to effect 
the appearance of this external negation. For as we have seen, 
every .external relation, inasmuch as it is not constituted by its 
very terms, requires a witness to posit it. Thus for the idealist 
^ for the realist one conclusion is imposed: due to the fact 
that the Other is revealed to us in a spatial world, we are sep- 
^ TV Other by a real or ideal space. 

TTus presupposition entails a serious consequence: if my 
relation to the Other must in fact be in the mode of indiffer- 



314 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ent exteriority, then I can not in my being be affected by 
either the upsurge or the abolition of the Other any more 
than an In-itself can be affected by the apparition or the dis- 
appearance of another In-itself. Consequently since the 
Other can not act on my being by means of' his being, the 
only way that he can reveal himself to me is by appearing as 
an object to my knowledge. But it must be understood by 
this that I must constitute the Other as the unification which 
my spontaneity imposes upon a diversity of impressions; that 
is, that I am the one who constitutes the Other in the field of 
his experience. Therefore the Other can be for me only an 
image in spite of the fact that the whole theory of knowledge 
which I have erected aims at rejecting this notion of image. 
Only a witness external both to myself and to the Other 
could compare the image with the model and decide whether 
it is a true one. Moreover this witness in order to be author- 
ized could not in turn maintain ,a relation of exteriority with 
both the Other and myself, for otherwise he would know us 
only by images. Within the ekstatic unity of his being, he 
would have to be simultaneously here upon me as the internal 
negation of myself and over there upon the Other as the in~ 
ternal negation of the Other. 

Thus the recourse to God, which we find in Leibniz, is 
purely and simply a recourse to the negation of interiority; 
it is concealed in the theological notion of creation: God at 
the same time is and is not both myself and the Other since he 
creates us. He must of necessity be myself in order to appre- 
hend my reality without intermediary and with apodictic evi- 
dence, and yet it is necessary that he not be me in order that 
he may preserve his impartiality as witness and be able over 
&ere both to be and not be the Other. The image of creation 
is the most adequate here since in the creative act I look into 
the very heart of what I create — ^for what I create is me — and 
yet what I create opposes itself to me by closing in on itself in 
an affirmation of objectivity. Thus the spatializing presupposi- 
tion does not leave us any choice: it must either resort to God 
or fall into a probabilism which leaves the door open to 
solipsism. 

But this conception of a God who is his creatures makes 
us fall into a new dilemma: this is the difficulty presented by 
the problem of substances in post-Cartesian thought. If .God 
IS I and if he is the Other, then what guarantees my own 
existence? If creation is held to be continuous, I remain al- 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


315 


ways suspended between a distinct existence and a pantheistic 
fusion with the Creator Being. If Creation is an original act 
and if I am shut up against God, then nothing any longer 
guarantees my existence to God; he is now united to me 
only by a relation of exteriority, as the sculptor is related to 
the finished statue, and once again he can know me only 
through images. Under these conditions the notion of God, 
while revealing to us the internal negation as the only possible 
connection between consciousnesses, shows the concept’s total 
inadequacy: God is neither necessary nor sufficient as a 
guarantee of 'the Other’s existence. Fi^ermore God’s exis- 
tence as the intermediary between me and the Other already 
presupposes the presence of the Other to me in an intemd 
connection; for God, being endowed with the essential quali- 
ties of a Mind, appears as the quintessence of the Other, and 
he must be able to maintain an internal connection with my- 
self in order for a real foundation of the Other’s existence to 
be valid for me. It seems therefore that a positive theory of the 
Other’s existence must be able simultaneously to avoid solip- 
sism and to dispense with a recourse to God if it envisages 
my original relation to the Other as an internal negation; that 
is, as a negation which posits the original distinction be- 
tween the Other and myself as being such that it determines 
me by means of the Other and determines the Other by 
means of me. Is it possible to look at the question from th^ 
point of view? 

ni. HUSSERL, HEGEL, HEIDEGGER 

The philosophy of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries 
seems to have understood that once myself and the Other are 
considered as two separate substances, we cannot escape sol- 
ipsism; any union of these two substances must in fact be held 
to be impossible. That is why the examination of modem theo- 
ries reveals to us an attempt to seize at the very heart of the con- 
^lousness a fundamental, transcending connection with the 
Other which would be constitutive of each consciousness in 
ife very upsurge. But while this philosophy appears to abandon 
me postidate of the external negation, it nevertheless preserves 
its essential consequence; that is, the aflarmation that my fun- 
damental connection with the Other is realized through 
Knovfledge, 



316 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


When Husserl in his Cartesian Meditations and in Formal 
and Transcendental Logic attempts to refute solipsism, he be- 
lieves that he can succeed by showing that a referral to the 
Other is the indispensable condition for the constitution of a 
world. Without going into the details of his theory, wo shall 
limit ourselves to indicating his general position. For Husserl 
the world as it is revealed to consciousness is mter-monadic. 

The Other is present in it not only as a particular concrete 
and empirical appearance but as a permanent condition of 
its unity and of its richness. Whether I consider this table 
or this tree or this bare wall in solitude or with companions, 
the Other is always there as a, layer of constitutive meanings 
which belong to the very object which I consider; in short, 
he is the veritable guarantee of the object’s objectivity. And 
since our psycho-physical self is contemporary with the 
world, forms a part of the world, and falls with the world 
under the impact of the phenomenological reduction, the 
Other appears as necessary to the very constitution of this ] 
self. If I am to doubt the existence of my friend Pierre or of j 
others in general, then inasmuch as this existence is on prin- j 
ciple outside my experience I must of necessity doubt also my ^ 
concrete being, my empirical reality as a professor having 
this or that tendency, these habits, this particular character. 
There is no privilege for my self: my empirical Ego and 
the Other’s empirical Ego appear in the world at the same 
time. The general meaning of “Others” is necessary to the 
constitution of each one of these “Egos.” Thus each object 
far from being constituted as for Kant, by a simple relation 
to the subject, appears in my concrete experience as poly- 
valent; it is given originally as possessing systems of refer- 
ence to an indefinite plurality of consciousnesses; it is on the 
table, on the wall that the Other is revealed to me as that 
to which the object under consideration is perpetually re- 
ferred as well as on the occasion of the concrete appear- 
ances of Pierre or Paul. 

To be sure, these views show progress over the classical 
jwsitions. It is undeniable that the instrumental-thing from 
the moment of its discovery refers to a plurality of For-itselfs. 

We shall have to return to this point It is also certain that 
the meaning of “the Other” can not come from the ex- 
perience nor from a reasoning by analogy effected on the 
occasion of the experience; on the contrary, it is in the 
ig of the concept of the Other that the experience is in- 


THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


317 


terpreted. Does that mean that the concept of the Other is a 
priori? This we shall attempt to determine later. But in spite 
of these undeniable advantages Husserl’s theory does not seem 
to us perceptibly different from Kant’s. This is due to the 
fact that while my empirical Ego is not any more sure than 
the Other’s, Husserl has retained the transcendental subject, 
which is radically distinct from the Ego and which strongly 
resembles the Kantian subject. Now what ought to be dem- 
onstrated is that it is not the parallelism of the empirical 
“Egos”- which throws doubt on the person but that of the tran- 
scendental subjects. This is because actually the Other is 
never that empirical person who is encountered in my experi- 
ence; he is the transcendental subject to whom this person by 
nature refers. Thus the true problem is that of the connection 
of transcendental subjects who are beyond experience. If 
someone replies that from the start the transcendental subject 
refers to other subjects for the constitution of the noematic 
whole, it is easy to reply that it refers to them as to meanings. 
The Other here would be a kind of supplementary category 
which would allow a world to be constituted, not a real being 
existing beyond this world. Of course the “category” of the 
Othgf implies in its very meaning a reference from the other 
side of the world to a subject, but this reference could be only 
hypothetical. It has the pure value of the content of a unify- 
mg concept; it is valid in and for the world. Its laws are 
limited to the world, and the Other is by nature outside the 
world. Furthermore Husserl has removed the very possibility 
of understanding what can be meant by the extra-mundane 
being of the Other since he defines being as the simple indi- 
cation of an infinite series of operations to be effected. 
There could be no better way to measure being by knowledge. 
Now even admitting that knowledge in general measures 
being, the Other’s being is measured in its reality by the 
knowledge which the Other h^ of himself, not by that which 
I have of him. What I must attain is the Other, not as I ob- 
tam knowledge of him, but as he obtains knowledge of him- 
self — ^which is impossible. This would in fact suppose the in- 
ternal identification of myself with the Other. Thus we find 
here again that distinction on principle between the Other 
and myself which does not stem from the exteriority of our 
oodles but from the simple fact that each of us exists in in- 
wiority and that a knowledge valid for interiority can be 
eiiected only in interiority which on principle excludes all 



318 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

knowledge of the Other as he knows himself — i.e., as he is. 
Moreover Husserl understood this since he says that “the 
Other” as he is revealed to our concrete experience is an , 
absence. But within Husserl’s philosophy, at least, how can 
one have a full intuition of an absence? Tlie Other is the ob- 
ject of empty intentions, the Other on principle refuses him- 
self to us and flees. The only reality which remains is there- 
fore that of my intention; the O^er is the empty noema 
which corresponds to my directing toward the Other, to the 
extent that he appears concretely in my experience. He is an 
ensemble of operations of unification and of the constitution 
of my experience so that he appears as a transcendental con- 
cept. Husserl replies to the solipsist that the Other’s existence 
is as sure as that of the world, and Husserl includes in the 
world my psycho-physical existence. But the solipsist says the 
same thing: it is as sure, he will say, but no more sure. The 
existence of the world is measured, he will add, by the knowl- 
edge which I have of it; the case will not be otherwise for 
the existence of the Other. 

Formerly I believed that I could escape solipsism by re- 
futing Husserl’s concept of the existence of the Transcenden- 
tal “Ego.”^ At that time I thought that since I had emptied 
my consciousness of its subject, nothing remained there 
which was privileged as compared to the Other. But actually 
although I am still persuaded that the hypothesis of a tran- 
scendental subject is useless and disastrous, abandoning it 
does not help one bit to solve the question of the ejdstence 
of Others. Even if outside the empirical Ego there is nothing 
other than the consciousness of that Ego — ^that is, a tran- 
scendental field without a subject — the fact remains that my 
affirmation of the Other demands and requires the existence 
beyond the world of a similar transcendental field. Conse- 
quently the only way to escape solipsism would be here again 
to prove that my transcendental consciousness is, in its very 
bemg, affected by the extra-mundane existence of other con- 
sciousnesses of the same type. Because Husserl has reduced 
being to a series of meanings, the only connection which 
^ has been able to establish between my being and that of the 
Other is a connection of knowledge. Therefore Husserl can 
not escape solipsism any more than Kant could. 

If now instead of observing the rules of chronological 
succession, we are guided by those of a sort of non-tern- ' 

* “La transcendance de I’ego.” 1937. 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


319 


poral dialectic, we shall find that in the solution which 
Hegel gives to the problem in the first volume of The Phe- 
nomenology of Mind, he has made significant progress over 
Husserl. Here the appearance of the Other is indispensable 
not to the constitution of the world and of my empirical 
“Ego” but to the very existence of my consciousness as self- 
consciousness. In fact as self-consciousness, the Self itself 
apprehends itself. The equation “Myself = Myself” or “I am 
I” is precisely the expression of this fact. At first this self- 
consciousness is pure self-identity, pure existence for itself. It 
has certitude of itself, but this certitude still lacks truth. In 
fact this certitude would be true only to the extent that its 
own existence for itself appeared to it as an independent ob- 
ject. Thus self-consciousness is first a syncretic relation 
without truth between a subject and an object, an object 
which is not yet objectified and which is this subject him- 
self. Since the impulse of this consciousness is to realize its 
concept by becoming conscious of itself in all respects, it 
tends to make itself valid externally by giving itself objectiv- 
ity and manifest existence. It is concerned with making the 
“I am I” explicit and producing itself as an object in order to 
attain the ultimate stage of development. This state in an- 
other sense is naturally the prime mover for the becoming of 
consciousness; it is self-consciousness in general, which is rec- 
ognized in other self-consciousnesses and which is identical 
Mth them and with itself. The mediator is the Other. The 
Other appears along with myself since self-consciousness is 
identical with itself by means of the exclusion of every 
Other. Thus the primary fact is the plurality of conscious- 
nesses, and this plurality is realized in the form of a double, 
reciprocal relation of exclusion. Here we are then in the pres- 
ence of that connection by means of an internal negation 
which was demanded earlier. No external nothingness in- 
itself separates my consciousness from the Other’s conscious- 
ness; it is by the very fact of being me that I exclude the 
Other is the one who excludes me by being him- 
self, the one whom I exclude by being myself. Consciousnesses 
are directly supported by one another in a reciprocal imbrica- 
tion of their being. 

position allows us at the same time to define the 
^ which the Other appears to me: he is the one who is 
° therefore he is given as a non-essential object 

With a character of negativity. But this Other is also a self- 



320 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

consciousness. As such he appears to me as an ordinary object 
immersed in the being of life. Similarly it is thus that I appear 
to the Other: as a concrete, sensible, immediate existence. 
Here Hegel takes his stand on the ground not of a univocal 
relation which goes from me (apprehended by the cogito) 
to the Other, but of the reciprocd relation which he defines 
as “the self-apprehension of the one in the other.” In fact it 
is only in so far as each man is opposed to the Other that he 
is absolutely for himself. Opposite the Other and confronting 
the Other, each one asserts his right of being individual. Thus 
the cogito itself can not be a point of departure for philoso- 
phy; in fact it can be born only in consequence of my appear- 
ance for myself as an individual, and this appearance is con- 
ditioned by the recognition of the Other. The problem of the 
Other should not be posited in terms of the cogito; on the 
contrary, the existence of the Other renders the cogito possible 
as the abstract moment when the self is apprehended as an 
object. Thus the “moment” which Hegel calls being for the 
Other is a necessary stage of the development of self-con- 
sciousness; the road of interiority passes through the Other. 
But the Other is of interest to me only to the extent that he 
is another Me, a Me-object for Me, and conversely to the 
extent that he reflects my Me— /.c., is, in so far as I am an 
object for him. Due to the fact that I must necessarily be 
an object for myself only over there in the Other, I must ob- 
tain from the Other recognition of my being. But if another 
consciousness must mediate between my consciousness for 
itself and itself, then the being-fdr-itself of my conscious- 
ness — and consequently its being ■ in general — depends on 
the Other. As I appear to the Other, so I am. Moreover 
since the Other is such as he appears to me and since my 
being depends upon the Other, the way in which I appear — • 
that is, the moment of the development of my self-conscious- 
ness — depends on the way in which the Other appears to me. 
The value of the Other’s recognition of me depends on the 
value of my recognition of the Other. In this sense to the 
extent that the Other apprehends me as bound to a body 
and immersed in life, I am myself only an Other. In order to 
make myself recognized by the Other, I must risk my own life. 
To risk one’s life, in fact, is to reveal oneself as not-bound to 
the objective form or to any determined existence — as not- 
bound to life. 

But at the same time I pursue the death of the Other. 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


321 


This means that I wish to cause myself to be mediated by an 
Other who is only other — ^that is, by a dependent conscious- 
ness whose essential characteristic is to exist only for another. 
This will be accomplished at the very moment when I risk my 
life, for in the struggle against the other I have made an 
abstraction of my sensible being by risking it. On the other 
hand, the Other prefers life and freedom even while showing 
that he has not been able to posit himself as not-bound to the 
objective form. Therefore he remains bound to external things 
in general; he appears to me and he appears to himself as 
non-essential. He is the Slave, I am the Master; for him it is 
I who am essence. Thus there appears the famous “Master- 
Slave” relation which so profoundly influenced Marx. We 
need not here enter into its details. It is sufficient to observe 
that the Slave is the Truth of the Master. But this unilateral 
recognition is unequal and insufficient, for the truth of his 
self-certitude for the Master is a non-essential consciousness; 
therefore the Master is not certain of being for himself as 
truth. In order to attain this truth there is necessary “a mo- - 
ment in which the master does for himself what he does as 
regards the Other and when the slave does as regards the 
Other what he does for himself.”® At this moment there will 
appear a self-consciousness in general which is recognized in 
other self-consciousnesses and which is identical with them 
and with itself. 

Thus Hegel’s brilliant intuition is to make me depend on 
the Other in my being. I am, he said, a being for-itself which 
is for-itself only through another. Therefore the Other pene- 
trates me to the heart. I can not doubt him without doubting 
myself since “self-consciousness is real only in so far as it 
recognizes its echo (and its reflection) in another.”® Since the 
very doubt implies a consciousness which exists for itself, the 
Other’s existence conditions my attempt to doubt it just as in 
the work of Descartes my existence conditions systematic 
doubt. Thus solipsism seems to be put out of the picture 
once and for all. By proceeding from Husserl to Hegel, we 
have realized immense progress: first the negation which 
constitutes the Other is direct, internal, and reciprocal; 
second, it calls each consciousness to account and pierces 

to the deepest part of its being; the problem is posited 
on the level of inner being, of the universal and tran- 

® Ph6nominologle de VEsprlt, p. 148. Edition Cosson. 

^ Propedeutik, p. 20, first edition of the complete works. 



322 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

scendental “I”; finally in my essential being I depend on 
the essential being of the Other, and instead of holding that 
my being-for-myself is opposed to my being-for-others, I find 
that being-for-others appears as a necessary condition for my 
being-for-myself. 

Yet in spite of the wide scope of this solution, in spite of 
the richness and profundity of the detailed insights with 
which the theory of the Master and the Slave is filled to over- 
flowing, can we be satisfied with it? 

To be sure, Hegel has posed the question of the being of 
consciousnesses. It is being-for-itself ^d being-for-others 
which he is studying, and he holds that each conscious- 
ness includes the reality of the other. Nevertheless it is 
certain that this ontological problem remains everywhere for- 
mulated in terms of knov/ledge. The mainspring of the con- 
flict of consciousnesses is the effort of each one to transform 
his self-certitude into truth. And we know that this truth can 
be attained only in so far as my consciousness becomes an o6- 
ject for the Other at the same time as the Other becomes an 
object for my consciousness. Thus when idealism asks, “How 
can the Other be an object for me?” Hegel while remaining 
on the same ground as idealism replies; if there is in truth a 
Me for whom the Other is an object, this is because there is 
an Other for whom the Me is object Knowledge here is still 
the measure of being, and Hegel does not even conceive of 
the possibility of a being-for-others which is not finally re- 
ducible to a “being-as-object.” Thus a universal self-con- 
sciousness which seeks to disengage itself through all these 
dialectical phases is by its own admission reducible to a purely 
empty formula— the "I am I.” Yet Hegel writes, “This prop- 
osition regarding self-consciousness is void of ^1 content”^ 
And in another place he says, “fit is] the process of absolute 
abstraction which consists in surpassing all immediate existence 
and which results in the purely negative being of consciousness 
identical with itself.” The limiting term of this dialecti- 
cal conflict, universal self-consciousness, is not enriched in 
the midst of its avatars; it is on the contrary entirely de- 
nuded. It is no more than the “I know that another knows 
me as me.” Of course this is because for idealism absolute-' 

knowledge are" identical. But what does this 
Identification involve? 

To begin with, this “I am I,” a pure, universal form of 

’’ Propedeuilk, p. 20. 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


323 


identity, has nothing in common with the concrete conscious- 
ness which we have attempted to describe in our Introduction. 
There we established that the being of self-consciousness 
could not be defined in terms of knowledge. Knowledge be- 
gins with reflection (reflexion) but the game of “refiection 
(re/?eO -reflecting” is not a subject-object dyad, not even im- 
plicitly. Its being does not depend on any transcendent con- 
sciousness; rather its mode of being is precisely to be in ques- 
tion for itself. We showed subsequently in the first chapter of 
Part Two that the relation of the reflection to the reflecting 
was in no way a relation of identity and could not be reduced 
to the “Me = Me” or to the “I am I” of Hegel. The reflection 
does not make itself be the reflecting; we are dealing here with 
a being which nihilates itself in its being and which seeks in 
vain to dissolve into itself as a self. If it is true that this de- 
scription is the only one which allows us to understand the 
original fact of consciousness, then we must judge that Hegel 
has not succeeded in accounting for this abstract doubling of 
the Me which he gives as equivalent to self-consciousness. 
Finally we succeeded in getting rid of the pure unreflective 
consciousness of the transcendental “I” which obscured it 
and we showed that selfness, the foundation of personal exis- 
tence, was altogether different from an Ego or from a refer- 
ence of the Ego to itself. There /can be, therefore, no 
question of defining consciousness in terms of a transcen- 
dental ego-ology. In short, consciousness is a concrete being 
sui generis, not an abstract, unjustifiable relation of identity. 
It is selfness and not the seat of an opaque, useless Ego. Its 
being is capable of being reached by a transcendental reflec- 
tion, and there is a truth of consciousness which does not 
depend on the Other; rather the very being of consciousness, 
since it is independent of knowledge, pre-exists its truth. On 
this plane as for naive realism, being measures truth; for the 
truth of a reflective intuition is measured by its conformity to 
being: consciousness was there before it was known. There- 
fore if consciousness is affirmed in the face of the Other, it is 
because it lays claim to a recognition of its being and not of 
an abstract truth. In fact it would be ill conceived to think 
that the ardent and perilous conflict between master and 
slave had for its sole stake the recognition of a formula as 
barren and abstract as the "I am I.” Moreover there would 
be a deception in this very conflict since the end finally at- 
tained would be universal self-consciousness, “the intuition 



324 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


of the existing self by the self.” Here as everywhere we ought 
to oppose to Hegel Kierkegaard, who represents the claims 
of the individual as such. The individual claims his achieve- 
ment as an individual, the recognition of his concrete being, 
and of the objective specification of a universal structure. Of 
course the rights which I demand from the Other posit the 
universality of self; respect of persons demands the recog- 
nition of my person as imiversal. But it is my concrete 
and individual being which flows into this universal and fills 
it; it is for that being-there that I demand rights. The particu- 
lar is here the support and foundation of the universal; the 
universal in this case could have no meaning if it did not 
exist for the purpose of the individual. 

This identification of bemg and knowledge results in a large 
number of errors or impossibilities. We shall consider them 
here under two headings; that is, we shall marshal agamst 
Hegel a twofold charge of optimism. 

In the first place Hegel appears to us to be guilty of an 
epistemological optimism. It seems to him that the truth of 
self-consciousness can appear; that is, that an objective agree- 
ment can be realized between consciousnesses — ^by authority 
of the Other’s recognition of me and my recognition of the 
Other. This recognition can be simultaneous and reciprocal; 
“I know that the Other knows me as himself.” It produces 
actually and in truth the universality of self-consciousness. But ' 
the correct statement of the problem of Others renders this 
passage to the umversal impossible. If the Other can in fact 
refer my ‘‘self” to me, then at least at the end of the dialecti- 
cal evolution there must be a common measure between what 
I am for him, what he is for me, what I am for myself, what 
he is. for himself. Of course this homogeneity does not exist 
at the start; Hegel agrees to this. The relation “Master-Slave” 
is not reciprocal. But Hegel affirms that the reciprocity must 
be capable of being establidied. Here at the outset he is creat- 
mg a confusion — so easy that it seems voluntary — ^between 
being-an-object and 7j/e,.The Other, he says, appears to me as 
^ object. Now the object is Myself in the Other. When 
Hegel wants to define object-state more exactly, he dis- 
tmgmshes in it three elements: “This self-apprehension by 
one m tlw other is: (1) The abstract moment of self-identity. 
(2) Each one, however, has also this particularity, that he 
manifests himself to the Other as an external object, as an 
immediately concrete and sensible existence. (3) Each one is 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 325 

absolutely for himself and individual as opposed to the 
other.”® 

We see that the abstract moment of self-identity is given 
in the knowledge of the Other. It is given with two other 
moments of the total structure. But — a curious thing in a 
philosopher of Synthesis — Hegel did not ask if these three el^ 
ments did not react on one another in such a way as to consti- 
tute a new form resistant to analysis. He defines his point of 
view in the Phenomenology of Mind when he declares that 
the Other appears first as non-essential (this is the sense of the 
third moment cited above) and as a “consciousness immersed 
in the being of life.” But here we are dealing with a pure co- 
existence of the abstract moment and of life. It is sufficient 
therefore that I or the Other risk our life in order that in the 
very act of offering oneself to danger, we realize the analytical 
separation of life and consciousness: “What the Other is for 
each consciousness, each consciousness is for the Other; each 
consciousness in turn accomplishes in itself by mejans of its 
own activity and by means of the activity of the Other, that 
pure abstraction of being for itself. ... To present oneself 
as a pure abstraction of self-consciousness is to reveal oneself 
as a pure negation of one’s objective form, to reveal oneself as 
not-bound to any determined existence; ... it is to reveal 
oneself as not-bound to life.”® Of course Hegel will say later 
that by the experience of risk and of the danger of death, 
self-consciousness learns that life is as essential to it as pure 
self-consciousness; but this is from a totally different point 
of view, and the fact still remains that I can always separate, 
m the Other, the pure truth of self-consciousness from his 
life. Thus the slave apprehends the self-consciousness of the 
paster; he is its truth although, as we have seen, this truth 
is still not adequate.’^® 

But is it the same thing to say that the Other on 
principle appears to me as an object and to say that he appears 
to me as bound to a particidar existence, as immersed in life? 
If we remain on the level of pure, logical hypotheses, we shall 
note ffist that the Other can in fact be given to a conscious- 
ness in the form of an object without that object’s being 
precisely bound to that contingent object which we call a 
living body. In fact our experience presents us only with con- 

® Propedeutik, p. 18 . 

'‘Phinomdnologie de I’Esprit, p. 148. 

Ph6nomSnologie de VEsprlt. p. 148. 



326 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


scious, living individuals, but in theory it must be remarked 
that the Other is an object for me because he is the Other and 
not because he appears on the occasion of a body-object; 
otherwise we should fall back into the illusion of space which 
we discussed above. Thus what is essential to the Other qua 
Other is objectivity and not life. Moreover Hegel took ftis 
logical aflBrmation as his point of departure. 

But if it is true that the connection between a conscious- 
ness and life does not distort the nature of the “abstract mo- 
ment of self-consciousness” which remains there, immersed, 
always capable of being discovered, is the case the same for 
objectivity? In other words, since we know that a conscious- 
ness is before being known, then is not a known consciousness 
wholly modified by the very fact that it is known? Is 
“to appear as an object for a consciousness” still “to be con- 
sciousness"? It is easy to reply to this question: the very 
being of self-consciousness is such that in its being, its being 
is in question; this means that it is pure interiority. It is per- 
petually a reference to a self which it has to be. Its being is 
defined by this: that it is tMs being in the mode of being 
what it is not and of not being what it is. Its bemg, there- 
fore, is the radical exclusion of ail objectivity. I am the one 
who can not be an object for myself, the one who can not 
even conceive for myself of existence in the form of an ob- 
ject (save on the- plane of the reflective dissociation — ^but we 
have seen that reflection is the drama of the being who can 
not be an object for himself) . This is not because of the lack 
of detachment or because of an intellectual prejudice or of a 
limit imposed on my knowledge, but because objectivity de- 
mands an explicit negation: the object is what I make myself 
not-be whereas I myself am what I make myself be. I pursue 
myself everywhere, I can not escape myself, I reapprehend 
myself from behind. Even if I could attempt to make myself 
an object, I would already be myself at the heart of that ob- 
ject which I am; and at the very center of that object I 
should have to be the subject who is looking at it, More- 
wer &is is what Hegel hinted at when he said that the 
Other s existence is necessary in order for me to be an object 
for myself. But by holding that self-consciousness is ex- 
pressed by the “I am I" — f.e., by identifying it with self- 
knowledge — ^he failed to derive the consequences of his first 
^rmations; for he introduced into consciousness something 
like an object existing potentially to be disengaged with- 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


327 


out change by the Other. But if to be an object is precisely 
not-to-be-me, then the fact of being an object for a con- 
sciousness radically modifies consciousness not in what it 
is for itself but in its appearance to the Other. The Other’s 
consciousness is what I can simply contemplate and what 
because of this fact appears to me as being a pure given 
instead of being what has to be me. It is what is released to 
me in universal time (i.e., in the original dispersion of mo- 
ments) instead of appearing to me within the unity of its 
own temporalization. For the only consciousness which 
can appear to me in its own tempordization is mine, and it 
can do so only by renouncing all objectivity. In short the 
for-itself as for-itself can not be known by the Other. The 
object which_ I apprehend under the name of the Other 
appears to me in a radically other form. The Other is not a 
for-itself as he appears to me; I do not appear to myself as I 
am for-the-Other. I am incapable of apprehending for myself 
the self which I am for the Other, just as I am incapable of 
apprehending on the basis of the Other-as-object which ap- 
pears to me, what the Other is for himself. How then could 
we establish a universal concept subsuming under the name 
of self-consciousness, my consciousness for myself and (of) 
myself and my knowledge of the Other? But this is not all. 

According to Hegel the Other is an object, and I appre- 
hend myself as an oSject in the Other. But one of these 
afiBrmations destroys the other. In order for me to be able to 
appear to myself as an object in the Other, I would have to 
apprehend the Other as subject; that is, to apprehend him in 
his interiority. But m so far as the Other appears to me as 
object, my objectivity for him can not appear to me. Of course 
I apprehend that the Other-as-object refers to me by means 
of intentions and acts, but due to the very fact that he is an 
object, the Other-as-a-mirror is clouded and no longer reflects 
an5rthing. These intentions and these acts are thin gs in the 
world and are apprehended m the Time of the World; 
^ey are established and contemplated, their meaning is an ob- 
ject for me. Thus I can only appear to myself as a transcen- 
dent quality to which the Other’s acts and intentions refer; 
but smce die Other’s objectivity destroys my objectivity for 
bim, it is as an internal subject that I apprehend myself as 
being that to which those intentions and those acts refer. It , 
understood that this apprehension of myself by my- 
self is in pure terms of consciousness, not of knowledge; by 



328 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

having to be what I am in form of an ekstatic self-conscious- 
ness, I apprehend the Other as an object pointing to me. Thus 
Hegel’s optimism results in failure: between the Other-as-ob- 
ject and Me-as-subject there is no common measure, no 
more than between self-consciousness and consciousness of 
the Other, I can not know 'myself in the Other if the Other 
is first an object for me; neither can I apprehend the Other in 
his true being — that is, in his subjectivity. No universal 
knowledge can be derived from the relation of conscious- 
nesses. This is what we shall call their ontological separation. 

But there is in Hegel another and more fundamental form 
of optimism. This may be called an ontological optimism. For 
Hegel indeed truth is truth of the Whole. And he places him- 
self at the vantage point of truth — Le., of the Whole — ^to con- 
sider the problem of the Other. Thus when Hegelian monism 
considers the relation of consciousness, it does not put it- 
self in any particular consciousness. Although the Whole is 
to be realized, it is already there as the truth of all which is ■ 
true. Thus when Hegel writes that every consciousness, since 
it is identical with itself, is other than the Other, he has es- 
tablished himself in the whole, outside consciousnesses, and 
he considers them from the point of view of the Absolute. 
For individual consciousnesses are moments in the whole, 
moments which by themselves are Unselbstandig, and the 
whole is a mediator between consciousnesses. Hence is de- 
rived an ontological optimism parallel to the epistemological 
optunism: plurality can and must be surpassed toward 
the totality. But if Hegel can assert the reality of this sur- 
passing, it is because he has already given it to bhnself 
at the outset In fact he has forgotten his own consciousness; 
he is the Whole, and consequently if he so easily resolves 
the problem of p^icidar consciousnesses it is because for 
him there never has been any real problem in this connection. 
Actually he does not raise the question of the relation be- 
tween his own consciousness and that of the Other. By 
effecting completely the abstraction of his own, he studies 
purely and simply the relation between the consciousnesses 
of others i.e., the relation of consciousnesses which are 
already for him objects whose nature, according to him, is 
precisely that of being a particular type of object — the sub- 
ject-object. These consciousnesses from the totalitarian point 
of view which he has adopted are strictly equivalent to each 



THE EXISTENCE. OF OTHERS 329 

other although each of them is separated from the rest by a 
particular privilege.- 

But if Hegel has forgotten himself, we can not forget 
Hegel. This means that we are referred back to the cogito. In 
fact, if, as we have established, the being of my conscious- 
ness is strictly irreducible to knowledge, then I can not tran- 
scend my being toward a reciprocal and universal relation in 
which I could see my being and that of others as equivalent 
On the contrary, I must establish myself in my being and posit 
the problem of the Other in terms of my being. In a word the 
sole point of departure is the interiority of the cogito. We 
must understand by this that each one must be able by starting 
out from his own interiority, to rediscover the Other’s being as 
a transcendence which conditions the very being of that in- 
teriority. This of necessity implies that the multiplicity of 
consciousnesses is on principle unsurpassable, for I can un- 
doubtedly transcend myself toward a Whole, but I can not 
establish myself in this Whole so as to contemplate myself and 
to contemplate the Other. No logical or epistemological op- 
timism can cover the scandal of the plurality of conscious- 
nesses. If Hegel believed that it coidd, this is because he " 
never grasped the nature of that particular dimension of 
being which is self-consciousness. The task which an on- 
tology can lay down for itself is to describe this scandal 
and to found it in the very nature of being, but ontology 
is powerless to overcome it. It is possible — as we shall see 
better later — ^that we may be able to refute solipsism and 
show that the Other’s existence is both evident and cer- 
tain for us. But even if we could succeed in making the 
Other’s existence share in the apodictic certainty of the 
cogito — i.e., of my own existence — we should not thereby 
“surpass” the Other toward any inter-monad totality. So long 
as consciousnesses exist, the separation and conflict of con- 
sciousness will remain; we shall simply have discovered their 
foundation and their true terrain. 

What has this long criticism accomplished for us? 
Simply this: if we are to refute solipsism, then my relation to 
the Other is first and fundamentally a relation of being to 
being, not of knowledge to knowledge. We have seen Hus- 
serl’s failure when on this particular level he measures being 
by knowledge, and Hegel’s when he identifies knowledge 
and being. But we have equally recognized that Hegel, al- 
tnough his vision is obscured by the postulate of absolute 



330 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

idealism, has been able to put the discussion on its true plane. 

In Sein und Zeit Heidegger seems to have profited by 
study of his predecessors and to have been deeply impressed 
with this twofold necessity: (1) the relation between “hu- 
man-realities” must be a relation of being; (2) this relation 
must cause “human-realities” to depend on one another in 
their essential being. At least his theory fulfills these two re- 
quirementsi In his abrupt, rather barbaric fashion of cutting 
Gordian knots rather than trying to untie them, he gives in 
answer to the question posited a pure and simple definition. 
He has discovered several moments — ^inseparable except by 
abstraction — ^in “being-in-the-world,” which characterizes 
human reality. These moments are “world,” “being-in,” and 
“being.” He has described the world as “that by which hu- 
man reality makes known to itself what it is”; “being-in” he 
has defined as Befindlichkeit and Verstand.^^ We have still to 
speak of being; that is, the mode in which human reality is its 
being-in-the-world. This, Heidegger teUs us, is the mit-Sein 
— ^that is, “being-with.” Thus the characteristic of being of 
human-reality is its being with others. This does not 
come about by chance. I do not exist first in order that 
subsequently a contingency should make me encounter the 
Other. The question here is of an essential structure of my 
being. But this structure is not established from outside and 
from a totalitarian point of view as it was with Hegel. To 
be sure, Heidegger does not take his departure from the cogito 
in the Cartesian sense of the discovery of consciousness by 
itself; but the human-reality which is revealed to him and for 
which he seeks to fix the structures in concepts is his own. 
“Dasein ist je meines” he writes. It is by making explicit 
the pre-ontological comprehension which I have of myself that 
I apprehend being-with-others as an essential characteristic of 
my being. In short I discover the transcendental relation to 
the Other as constituting my own being, just as I have dis- 
covered that being-in-the-wofld measures my human-reality. 
Henceforth the problem of the Other is a false problem. The 
Other is no longer first a particular existence which I encoun- 
ter in the world — and which could not be indispensable to my 
own existence since I existed before encountering it. The 
Other is the ex-centric limit which contributes to the con- 

^-oughly, Befindlichkeit is “finitude” and Verstand “comprehension.” 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


331 


stitution of my being. He is the test of my being inasmuch 
as he throws me outside of myself toward structures which 
at once both escape me and define me; it is this test which 
originally reveals the Other to me. 

Let us observe in addition that the type of connection 
with the Other has changed. With realism, idealism, Husserl, 
Hegel, the type of relation between consciousnesses was being- 
for; the Other appeared to me and even constituted me 
in so far as he was for me or I was for him. The problem was 
the mutual recognition of consciousnesses brought face to 
face which appeared in the world and which confronted each 
other. “To-be-with” has an altogether different meaning; 
“with” does not intend the reciprocal relation of recognition 
and of conflict which would result from the appearance of a 
human-reality other than mine in the midst of the world. It 
expresses rather a sort of ontological solidarity for the exploita- 
tion of this world. The Other k not origin^ly bound to me 
as an ontic reality appearing in the midst of the world among 
“instruments” as a type of particular object; in that case he 
would be already degraded, and the relation uniting him to me 
could never take on reciprocity. The Other is not an object. 
In his connection with me he remains a human-reality; 
the being by which he determines me in my being is his pure 
-being apprehended as “being-in-the-world.” And we know 
that the “in” must be understood in the sense of colo, habito, 
not of insum; to-be-in-the-world is to haunt the world, not to 
be ensnared in it; and it is in my “being-in-the-world” that 
the Other determines me. Our relation is not a frontal opposi- 
tion but rather an oblique interdependence. In so far as I make 
a world exist as a complex of instruments which I use for the 
ends of my human reality, I cause myself to be determined in 
my being by a being who makes the world exist as a complex 
of instruments for the ends of his reality. Moreover it is not 
necessary to understand this being-with as a pure con- 
comitance which is passively received by my being. For Hei- 
<^®gger, to be is to be one’s own possibilities; that is, to 
make oneself be. It is then a mode of being which I make 
myself be. And it is very true that I am responsible for my 
bemg-for the Other in so far as I realize him freely in authen- 
ticity or in unauthenticity. It is in complete freedom and by an 
wigmal choice that, for example, I realize my being-wilh in 
me anonymous form of “they.” And if I am asked how my 
being-with” can exist for-myself, I must reply that through 



332 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

the world I make known to myself what I am. In particul^ 
when I am in the unauthentic mode of the “they,’ the world 
refers to me a sort of impersonal reflection of my nnauthen- 
tic possibilities in the form of instruments and complexes of 
instruments which belong to “everybody” and which belong 
to me so far as I am “everybody”! ready-made clothes, 
common means of transportation, parks, gardens, public 
places, shelters made for anyone who may take shelter there, 
etc. lims I make myself known as anybody by means of the 
indicative complex of instruments which in(hcate me as a 
Worumwillen. The unauthentic state — which is my ordinary 
state in so far as I have not realized my conversion to authen- 
ticity — ^reveals to me my “being-with,” not as the relation of 
one unique personality with other personalities equally umque, 
not as the mutual connection of “most irreplaceable bein^,” - 
but as a total interchangeability of the terms of the relation. 
The determination of the terms is still lacking; I am not 
opposed to the Other, for I am not “me”; instead we have 
the social unity of the they. To posit the problem on the level 
of the incommunicability of individual subject was to com- 
mit an Oorapov irpdTspov,^ to stand the world on its head. 
Authenticity and individuality have to be earned: I shall be 
my own authenticity only if under the influence of the call of 
conscience {Ruf des Gewissens) I launch out toward death 
with a resolute-decision {Entschlossenheit) as toward my own 
most peculiar possibility. At this moment I reveal myself to 
myself in authenticity, and I raise others along with myself 
toward the authentic. 

The empirical image which may best symbolize Heideg- 
ger’s intuition is not that of a conflict but rather a crew. The 
original relation of the Other and my consciousness not 
the you and me; it is the we. Heidegger’s being-with is not 
the clear and distinct position of an individual confronting 
another individual; it is not knowledge. It is the mute exis- 
tence in common of one member of the crew with his fellows, 
that existence which the rhythm of the oars or the regular 
movements of the coxswain will render sensible to the rowers 
and which will be made manifest to them by the common goal 
to be attained, the boat or the yacht to be overtaken, and the 
entire world (spectators, performance, etc.) which is profiled 
on the horizon. It is on the common ground of this co-exis- 
tence that the abrupt revelation of my “being-unto-death” 

^^Tr. Correction for iartiQov nc6t7)Qov, obviously a misprint. 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


333 


will suddenly make me stand out in an absolute “common soli- 
tude” while at the same time it raises the others to that soli- 
tude. 

This time we have indeed been given what we asked for: 
a being which in its own being implies the Other’s being. And 
yet we can not consider ourselves satisfied. First of all, Hei- 
degger’s theory offers us the indication of the solution to be 
found rather than that solution itself. Even if we should with- 
out reservation accept his substitution of “being-with” for 
“being-for,” it would still remain for us a simple affirmation 
without foundation. Undoubtedly we shall encounter certain 
empirical states of our being — ^in particular that to which the 
Germans give the untranslatable name Stimmung ^^ — ^which 
seem to reveal a co-existence of consciousnesses rather than a 
relation of opposition. But it is precisely - this co-existence 
which must be explained. Why does it become the unique 
foundation of our being? Why is it the fundamental type of 
our relation with others? Why did Heidegger believe that he 
was authorized to pass from tMs empirical and ontic establish- 
ment of being-with to a position claiming co-existence as the 
ontological structure of my “being-in-the-world”? And what 
type of being does this co-existence have? To what extent is 
the negation which, makes the Other an other and which con- 
stitutes him as non-essential maintained? If we suppress it 
entirely, are we not going to fall into a monism? And if we 


are to preserve it as an essential structure of the relation to 
the Other, then what modification must it undergo in order 
to lose the character of opposition which it had in being-for- 
others and acquire this character as a connection which creates 
solidarity and which is the very structure of being-with? And 
how shall we be able to pass from there to the concrete ex- 
perience of the Other in the world, as when from my window 
I see a man walking in the street? To be smre it is tempting to 
conceive of myself as standing out on the undifferentiated 
^ound of the human by means of the impulse of my freedom, 
by the choice of my unique possibilities — and perhaps this 
conception holds an important element of truth. But in this 
torm at least such a view gives rise to serious objections. 

First of all, the ontological point of view joins here with 
me abstract view of the Kantian subject. To say that human 


. Literally “pitch” or “tuning.” Perhaps the nearest English equivalent 
IS sympathy” in its original Greek sense of feeling or experiencing with 
someone. 



334 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


reality (even if it is my human reality) “is-with*’ by means of 
its ontological structure is to say that it is-with by nature — 
that is, in an essential and universal capacity. Even if this 
affirmation were proved, it would not enable us to explain any 
concrete bcing-with. In otiicr words, the ontological co-cxis- 
tence which appears as the structure of “heing-in-thc-world” 
can in no way serve ns a foundation to an ontic being-witb, 
such as, for example, the co-cxislcncc whicli appears in my 
friendship with Pierre or in the couple which Annie and I 


make. In fact it would he neccs<.ary to .show that “heine- 
with-Pierre” or "bcing-wiih-Annic” Is a structure constitu- 
tive of my concrete-being. But this is impossible from the 
point of view which Heidegger has adopted. The Other in 
the relation "with,” taken on tltc ontological level, can not in 
fact be concretely determined any more than llic directly 
confronted human-reality of which it is the alter ego; it is 
an abstract term and hence Utnclh^iUndif’, and it does not 
wntain the power of becoming that Othcr—Pierre or Annie. 
Thus the relation of the mit-Sein can be of absolutely no u.sc 
to us in resolving the psychological, concrete problem of the 
recognition of the Other. There arc two incommunicable 
levels and tsvo problems which demand separate solutions. 

difficulties 

which Heidegger encounters in passing in general from the 
ontological level to the ontic level, in passing from “being-in- 
e-worid in general to my relation with this particular in- 
s rument, in passing from my heing-iinto-dcath, svhich makes 
ot my death my most essentia! possibility, to this “ontic” 
ea h >yhich I shall experience by encountering this or that 
X erna existent. But this difficulty can be disguised, if need 
e, in all other eases since, for example, it is human reality 
Which causes the existence of a world in which a threat of 
death to human reality is hidden. Better yet, if the world 
fu f because it is “mortal” in the sense in which we say 
a a wound IS mortal. But the impossibility of passing from 
other bursts forth when we meet the problem 

ckstatic upsurge of its 
ing-in- e-world, human reality makes a world exist, one 
n not, for all that, say that its bcing-with causes another 
to rise up. Of course I am the being by whom 
hp?no But are we to say that I am the 

there is” another human-reality? If we un- 
y that that I am the being for whom there is for me 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


335 


another human reality, this is a pure and simple truism. If we 
mean that I am the being by whom there are in general 
Others, we fall back into solipsism. In fact this human reality 
“with whom” I am is itself “in-the-world-with-me”; it is the 
free foundation of a world. (How does this make it my 
world? We can not deduce from the being-with an identity 
of the worlds “in which” the human realities are.) Human 
reality is its own possibilities. It is then for itself without 
having to wait for me to make its being exist in the form of 
the “there is.” Thus I can constitute a world as “mortal,” but 
I can not constitute a human-reality as a concrete being 
which is its own possibilities. My being-with, apprehended 
from the standpoint of “my” being, can be considered only as 
a pure exigency founded in my being; it does not constitute 
the slightest proof of the Other’s existence, not the slightest 
bridge between me and the Other. 

More precisely, this ontological relation between me and an 
abstract Other, due to the very fact that it defines in general 
my relation to others, is far from facilitating a particular on- 
tic relation between me and Pierre; in fact it renders 
impossible any concrete connection between my being and a 
particular Other given in my experience. If my relation with 
the Other is a priori, it thereby exhausts all possibility of 
relation with others. Empirical and contingent relations can 
be only the specifications of it, not particular cases. There can 
be specifications of a law only under two circumstances: either 
the law is derived inductively from empirical, particular 
facts, and that is not the case here; or else it is a priori and 
unifies experience, as the Kantian concepts do. Actually in this 
latter case, its scope is restricted to the limits of experience: I 
find in things only what I have put into them. Now the act 
of relating two concrete “beings-in-the-world” can not 
belong to my experience; and it therefore escapes from the 
domain of being-with. But as the law precisely constitutes 
Us own domain, it excludes a priori every real fact which it 
has not constructed. The existence of time as an a priori form 
of my sensibility would a priori exclude me from all connec- 
hon with a noumenal time which had the characteristics of a 
bemg. Thus the existence of an ontological and hence a 
priori “being-with” renders impossible all ontic connection 
viin a concrete human-reality which would arise for-itself- 
as an absolute transcendent. The “being-with,” conceived as a 



336 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

structure of my being, isolates me as surely as the arguments 
for solipsism. 

The reason for this is that Heidegger’s transcendence is a 
concept in bad faith: it aims, to be sure, at surpassing 
idealism, and it succeeds in so far as idealism presents us 
with a subjectivity at rest in itself and contemplating its own 
images. But the idealism thus surpassed is only a bastard form 
of idealism, a sort of empirical-critical psychologism. Un- 
doubtedly Heidegger’s human-reality “exists outside itself.” 
But this existence outside itself is precisely Heidegger’s def- 
inition of the self. It resemblet, neither the Platonic [Neo 
Platonic?] ekstasis where existence is really alienation, exis- 
tence in an Other, nor Malebranche’s vision in God, our own 
conception of the ekstasis and of the internal negation. Hei- 
degger does not escape idealism; his flight outside the self, as 
an a priori structure of his being, isolates him as surely as the 
Kantian reflection on the a priori conditions of our experi- 
ence.^ In fact what human-reality rediscovers at the inaccessi- 
ble limit of this flight outside itself is still the self: and the 
flight outside the self is a flight toward the self, and the 

world appears as the pure distance between the self and the 
self. 

Consequently it would be in vain to look in Sein und 
Zeit for a simultaneous surpassing of all idealism and of all 
realism. Heidegger’s attempt to bring human-reality out of its 
so itude raises those same difficulties which idealism generally 
encounters when it tries to found the existence of concrete 
beings which are similar to us and which as such escape our 
experience, which even as they are being constituted do not 
arise from our a priori. He seems to escape isolation because 
he takes the “outside of self” sometimes as being “outside-of- 
selt-toward-self” and sometimes as “outside-self-in-others.” 
aut the second interpretation of “outside of-self,” which Hei- 
^ egger surreptitiously slides in through his devious reasoning, 
is strictly incompatible with the first. Human-reality at the 
very eart of its ekstases remains alone. It is here that we can 
derive a new and valid insight as the result of our critical 
examination of Heidegger’s teaching: Human-reality remains 
a one ecause the Other’s existence has the nature of a con- 
ingen and irreducible fact. We encounter the Other; we do 
fnt. And if this fact still appears to us in the 

. ^ ° ^”®^®®sity, yet it does not belong with those “condi- 
ons of the possibility of our experience” or— if you prefer— 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


337 


with ontological necessity. If the Other’s existence is a neces- 
sity, it is a “contingent necessity”; that is, it is of the same 
type as the factual necessity which is imposed on the cogito. 
If the Other is to be capable of being given to us, it is 
by means of a direct apprehension which leaves to the en- 
counter its character as facticity, just as the cogito itself 
leaves all its facticity to my own thought, a facticity which 
nevertheless shares in the apodicity of the cogito itself — i.e., 
in its indubitability. 

This long exposition of doctrine will not therefore have 
been useless if it enables us to formulate the necessary and 
sufficient conditions under which a theory of the existence of 
others can be valid. 

(1) Such a theory can not offer a new proof of the exis- 
tence of others, or an argument better than any other against 
solipsism. Actually if solipsism is to be rejected, this can not 
be because it is impossible or, if you prefer, because nobody 
is truly solipsistic. The Other’s existence will always be sub- 
ject to doubt, at least if one doubts the Other only in words 
and abstractly; in the same way that without really being able 
to conceive of it, I can write, “I doubt my own existence.” In 
short the Other’s existence can not be a probability. Proba- 
bility can concern only objects which appear in our experi- 
ence and from which new effecte can appear in our experience. 
There is probability only if a validation or invalidation of it is 
at every moment possible. Thus since the Other on principle 
and in its “For-itself” is outside my experience, the proba- ’ 
bility of his existence as Another Self can never be either 
validated or invalidated; it can be neither believed nor dis- 
believed, it can not even be measured; it loses therefore its 
very being as probability and becomes a pure fictional con- 
jecture. In the same way M. Lalande^^ has effectively shown 
that an hypothesis concerning the existence of living beings on 
the planet Mars will remain purely conjectural with no 
chance of being either true or false so long as we do not have 
at our disposal instruments or scientific theories enabling us 
^ produce facts validating or invalidating this hypothesis. 
Fut the structure of the Other is on principle such that no 
new experiment will ever be able to be conceived, that no 
new theory will come to validate or invalidate the hypothesis 
of his existence, that no instrument will come to reveal new 
facts inspiring me to affirm or to reject this hypothesis. There- 

^Les theories de Vinduction et de Vexpirimentation. 



338 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

fore if the Other is not immediately present to me, and if 
his existence is not as sure as my own, all conjecture con- 
cerning him is entirely lacking in meaning. But if I do not 
conjecture about the Other, then, precisely, I affirm him. A 
theory of the Other’s existence must therefore simply question 
me in my being, must make clear and precise the meaning 
of that affirmation; in particular, far from inventing a proof, 
it must make explicit the very foundation of that certainty. In 
other words Descartes has not proved his existence. Actually I 
have always known that I existed, I have never ceased to 
practice the cogito. Similarly my resistance to solipsism — 
which is as lively as any I should offer to an attempt to doubt 
the cogito — proves that I have always known that the Other 
existed, that I have always had a total though implicit com- 
prehension of his existence, that this “prc-ontological” com- 
prehension comprises a surer and deeper understanding of the 
nature of the Other and the relation of his being to my being 
than all the theories which have been built around it. If the 
Other’s existence is not a vain conjecture, a pure fiction, this 
is because there is a sort of cogito concerning it. It is this 
cogito which we must bring to light by specifying its struc- 
tures and determining its scope and its laws. 

(2) On the other hand, Hegel’s failure has shown us that 
the only point of departure possible is the Cartesian cogito. 
Moreover the cogito alone establishes us on the ground of that 
factual necessity which is the necessity of the Other’s exis- 
tence. Thus what for lack of a better term we called the cogi- 
to of the Other’s existence is merged with my own cogito. 
The cogito examined once again must throw me outside it 
and onto the Other, just as it threw me outside upon the In- 
itself; and this must be done not by revealing to me an fl 
priori structure of myself which would point toward an 
equally a priori Other but by disclosing to me the concrete, 
indubitable presence of a particular, concrete Other, just 
as it has already revealed to me my own incomparable, 
contingent but necessary, and concrete existence. Thus we 
must ask the For-itself to deliver to us the For-others; we 
must ask absolute immanence to throw us into absolute 
transcendence. In my own inmost depths I must find not 
reasons for believing that the Other exists but the Other 
himself as not being me. 

(3) What the cogito must reveal to us is not the-Other-as- 



339 


THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 

object. For a long time now it must have been obvious that 
what is called an object is said to be probable. If the Other 
is an object for me, he refers me to probability. But proba- 
bility is founded solely on the infinite congruity of our repre- 
sentations. Since the Other is neither a representation nor a 
system of representations nor a necessary unity of our repre- 
sentations, he can not be probable: he can not at first be an 
object. Therefore if he is for us, this can be neither as a 
constitutive factor of our knowledge of the world nor as a 
constitutive factor of our knowledge of the self, but as one 
who “interests” our being, and that not as he contributes a 
priori to constitute our being but as he interests it concretely 
and “ontically” in the empirical circumstances of our facticity. 

(4) If we attempt somehow regarding the Other what 
Descartes attempted to do for God with that extraordinary 
“proof by the idea of perfection” which is wholly animated 
by the intuition of transcendence, then for our apprehension 
of the Other qua Other we are compelled to reject a certain 
type of negation which we have called an external negation. 
The Other must appear to the cogito as not being me. This 
negation can be conceived in two ways: either it is a pure, ex- 
ternal negation, and it will separate the Other from myself as 
one substance from another substance — and in this case all 
apprehension of the Other is by definition impossible; or else 
it will be an internal negation, which means a synthetic, 
active connection of the two terms, each one of which con- 
stitutes itself by denying that it is the other. This negative re- 
lation will therefore be reciprocal and will possess a twofold 
inter! ority: This means first that the multiplicity of “Others” 
will not be a collection but a totality (in this sense we admit 
that Hegel is right) since each Other finds his being in the 
Other.is It also means that this Totality is such that it is on 
principle impossible for us to adopt “the point of view of the 
whole.” In fact we have seen that no abstract concept of 
consciousness can result from the comparison of my being-for- 
myself with my object-state for the Other. Furthermore this 
totality — like that of the For-itself — is a detotalized totality; 
for since existence-for-others is a radical refusal of the Other, 
no totalitarian and unifying synthesis of “Others” is possible. 

It is in the light of these few observations that we in turn 
shall now attack the question of The Other. 

^ Chaque autrui trouve son etre en I’autre. 



340 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

IV. THE LOOK 

This woman whom I see coming toward me, this man who is 
passing by in the street, this beggar whom I hear callmg 
before my window, all are for me objects — of that there is no 
doubt. Thus it is true that at least one of the modalities of 
the Other’s presence to me is objecr-ness. But we have 
seen that if this relation of object-ness is the fundamental 
relation between the Other and myself, then the Other’s 
existence remains purely conjectural. Now it is not only 
conjectural but probable that this voice which I hear is that 
of a man and not a song on a phonograph; it is infinitely 
probable that the passerby whom I sec is a man and not a 
perfected robot This means tliat without going beyond the 
limits of probability and indeed because of this very prob- 
ability, my apprehension of the Other as an object essentially 
refers me to a fundamental apprehension of the Other in 
which he will not be revealed to me as an object but as a 
“presence in person.” In short, if the Other is to be a prob- 
able object and not a dream of an object, then his object-ness 
must of necessity refer not to an original solitude beyond my 
reach, but to a fundamental connection in which the Other is 
manifested in some way other than through the knowledge 
which I have of him. The classical theories arc right in con- 
sidering that every perceived human organism refers to some- 
thing and that this to which it refers is the foundation and 
guarantee of its probability. Their mistake lies in believing 
that this^ reference indicates a separate existence, a conscious- 
ness which would be behind its perceptible manifestations as 
the noumenon is behind the Kantian Empfindung. Whether 
or not this consciousness exists in a separate state, the face 
which I see does not refer to it; it is not this consciousness 
which is the truth of the probable object which I perceive. 

the reference to a twin upsurge in which the 
n presence for me to a “being-in-a-pair-with-the- 

V given outside of knowledge proper even 

n the latter be conceived as an obscure and unexpressible 
order of intuition. In other words, the problem 
of Others has generally been treated as if the primary relation 
♦ 1 ^ Other is discovered is object-ness; that is, as if 

the Other were first revealed — directly or indirectly— to our 
perception. But since this perception by its very nature refers 
to something other than to itself and since it can refer 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


341 


neither to an infinite series of appearances of the same type — 
as in idealism the perception of the table or of the chair does 
— ^nor to an isolated entity located on principle outside my 
reach, its essence must be to refer to a primary relation be- 
tween my consciousness and the Other’s. This relation, in 
which the Other must be given to me directly as a subject 
although in connection with me, is the fundamental relation, 
the very type of my being-for-others. 

Nevertheless the reference here cannot be to any mystic 
or ineffable experience. It is in the reality of everyday life 
that the Other appears to us, and his probability refers to 
everyday reality. The problem is precisely this: there is in 
everyday reality an original relation to the Other which can 
be constantly pointed to and which consequently can be re- 
vealed to me outside all reference to a religious or mystic un- 
knowable. In order to understand it I must question 
more exactly this ordinary appearance of the Other in the 
field of my perception; since this appearance refers to that 
fundamental relation, the appearance must be capable of 
revealing to us, at least as a reality aimed at, the relation to 
which it refers. 

^ I am in a public park. Not far away there is a lawn and 
along the edge of that lawn there are benches. A man passes 
by those benches. I see this man; I apprehend him as an object 
and at the same time as a man. What does this signify? What 
do I mean when I assert that this object is a man? 

If I were to think of him as being only a puppet, I 
should apply to him the categories which I ordinarily use to 
group temporal-spatial “things.” That is, I should apprehend 
him as being “beside” the benches, two yards and twenty 
inches from the lawn, as exercising a certain pressure on the 
ground, etc. His relation with other objects would be of the 
purely additive type; this means that I could have him dis- 
appear without the relations of the other objects around him 
being perceptibly changed. In short, no new relation would 
appear through him between those things in my universe; 
grouped and synthesized from my point of view into instru- 
mental complexes, they would from his disintegrate into mul- 
tiplicities of indifferent relations. Perceiving him as a man, 
On the other hand, is not to apprehend an additive relation 
between the chair and him; it is to register an organization 
without distance of the things in my universe around that 
privileged object. To be sure, the lawn remains two yards 



342 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

and twenty inches away from him, but it is also as a Iciwti 
bound to him in a relation which at once both transcends 
distance and contains it. Instead of the two terms of the 
distance being indifferent, interchangeable, and in a reciprocal 
relation, the distance is unfolded starting from the rnan whom 
I see and extending up to the lawn as the synthetic upsurge 
of a univocal relation. We are dealing with a relation which 
is without parts, given at one stroke, inside of which there 
unfolds a spatiality which is not my spatiality; for instead 
of a grouping toward me of the objects, there is now an 
orientation which flees from me. 

Of course this relation witliout distance and without parts 
is in no way that original relation of the Other to me which I 
am seeking. In the first place, it concerns only the man and 
the things in the world. In addition it is stUl an object of 
knowledge; I shall express it, for example, by saying that this 
man sees the lawn, or that in spite of the prohibiting sign 
he is preparing to walk on the grass, etc. Finally it still retains 
a pure character of probability: First, it is probable that this 
object is a man. Second, even granted that he is a man, it re- 
mains only probable that he sees the lawn at the moment that 
I perceive him; it is possible that he is dreaming of some proj- 
ect without exactly being aware of what is around him, or 
that he is blind, etc., etc. Nevertheless this new relation of 
the object-man to the object-lawn has a particular character; 
it is simultaneously given to me as a whole, since it is there 
in the world as an object which I can know (it is, in fact, 
an objective relation which I express by saying: Pierre has 
glanced at this watch, Jean has looked out the window, etc.), 
and at the same time it entirely escapes me. To the extent 
that the man-as-object is the fundamental term of this relation, 
to the extent that the relation reaches toward him, it escapes 
me. I can not put myself at the center of it The distance 
which unfolds between the lawn and the man across the syn- 
thetic upsurge of this primary relation is a negation of the 
distance which I establish — as a pure type of external negation 
— ^between these two objects. The distance appears as a pure 
disintegration of the relations which I apprehend between the 
objects of my universe. It is not I who realize this disin- 
tegration; it appears to me as a relation which I aim at emptily 
across the distances which I originally established be- 
tween things. It stands as a background of things, a back- 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


343 


ground which on principle escapes me and which is conferred 
on them from without. Thus the appearance among the ob- 
jects of my universe of an element of disintegration in that 
universe is what I mean by the appearance of a man in my 
universe. 

The Other is first the permanent flight of things toward a 
goal which I apprehend as an object at a certain distance from 
me but which escapes me inasmuch as it unfolds about itself 
its own distances. Moreover this disintegration grows by de- 
grees; if there exists between the lawn and the Other a relation 
which is without distance and which creates distance, then 
there exists necessarily a relation between the Other and the 
statue which stands on a pedestal in the middle of the lawn, 
and a relation between the Other and the big chestnut trees 
which border the walk; there is a total space which is grouped 
around the Other, and this space is made with my space; 
there is a regrouping in which I take part but which escapes 
me, a regrouping of all the objects which people my universe. 
This regrouping does not stop there. The grass is something 
qualified; it is this green grass which exists for the Other; in 
this sense the very quality of the object, its deep, raw green is 
in direct relation to this man. This green turns toward the 
Other a face which escapes me. I apprehend the relation of 
the green to the Other as an objective relation, but I can not 
apprehend the green as it appears to' the Other. Thus sudden- 
ly an object has appeared which has stolen the world from 
me. Everything is in place; everything still exists for me; but 
everything is traversed by an invisible flight and fixed in the 
direction of a new object. The appearance of the Other in the 
world corresponds therefore to a fixed sliding of the whole 
universe, to a decentralization of the world which undermines 
the centralization which I am simultaneously effecting. 

But the Other is still an object for me. He belongs to my 
distances; the man is there, twenty paces from me, he is turn- 
ing his back on me. As such he is again two yards, twenty 
inches from the lawn, six yards from the statue; hence the 
disintegration of my universe is contained within the limits of 
this same universe; we are not dealing here with a flight of 
the world toward nothingness or outside itself. Rather it ap- 
pears that the world has a kind of drain hole in the middle 
of its being and that it is perpetually flowing off through this 
hole. The universe, the flow, and the drain hole are all once 
ngain recovered, reapprehended, and fixed as an object. All 



344 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


this is there for me as a partial structure of the world, even 
though the total disintegration of the universe is involved. 
Moreover these disintegrations may often be contained within 
more narrow limits. There, for example, is a man who is read- 
ing while he walks. The disintegration of the universe which 
he represents is purely virtual: he has ears which do not hear, 
eyes which see nothing except his book. Between his book and 
him I apprehend an undeniable relation without distance 
of the same type as that which earlier connected the walker 
■with the grass. But this time the form has closed in on itself. 
There is a full object for me to grasp. In the midst of the 
world I can say “man-reading” as I could say “cold stone,V 
“fine rain.” I apprehend a closed “Gestalt” in which the read- 
ing forms the essential quality; for the rest, it remains blind 
and mute, lets itself be known and perceived as a pure and 
simple temporal-spatial thing, and seems to be related to the 
rest of the world by a purely indiJfferent externality. The qual- 
ity “man-reading” as the relation of the man to the book is 
simply a little particular crack in my universe. At the heart 
of this solid, visible form he makes himself a particular empty- 
ing. The form is massive only in appearance; its peculiar 
meaning is to be — in the midst of my universe, at ten paces 
from me, at the heart of that massivity — a closely consolidated 
and localized flight. 

None of this enables us to leave the level on which the 
Other is an object. At most we are dealing with a particular 
type of objectivity akin to that which Husserl designated by 
fee term absence without, however, his noting feat fee Other 
is defined not as fee absence of a consciousness in relation to 
the body which I see but by the absence of the world which 
I perceive, an absence discovered at the very heart of my perr 
ception of this world. On this level the Other is an object in 
fee world, an object which can be defined by the world. But 
feis relation of flight and of absence on the part of the world 
in relation to me is only probable. If it is this which defines 
the objectivity of the Other, then to what original presence 
of the Other does it refer? At present we can give feis answer; 
if fee Other-as-object is defined in connection with fee world 
as the object which sees v/hat I see, then my fundamental con- 
nection wife the Other-as-subject must be able to be referred 
back to my permanent possibility of being seen by the Other. 
It is in and through the revelation of my being-as-object for 
the Other that I must be able to apprehend the presence of 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


345 


his being-as-subject. For just as the Other is a probable object 
for me-as-subject, so I can discover myself in the process of 
becoming a probable object for only a certain subject. This 
revelation can not derive from the fact that my universe is an 
object for the Other-as~object, as if the Other’s look after 
having wandered over the lawn and the surrounding objects 
came following a definite path to place itself on me. I have 
observed that I can not be an object for an object. A radical 
conversion of the Other is necessary if he is to escape ob- 
jectivity. Therefore I can not consider the look which the 
Other directs on me as one of the possible manifestations 
of his objective being; the Other can not look at me as he 
looks at the grass. Furthermore my objectivity can not itself 
derive for me from the objectivity of the world since I am 
precisely the one by whom there is a world ; that is, the one 
who on principle can not be an object for himself. 

Thus this relation which I call “being-seen-by-another,” 
far from being merely one of the relations signified by the 
word man, represents an irreducible fact which can not be 
deduced either from the essence of the Other-as-object, or 
from my being-as-subject. On the contrary, if the concept of 
the Other-as-object is to have any meaning, this can be only 
as the result of the conversion and the degradation of that 
original relation. In a word, my apprehension of the Other 
in the world as probably being a man refers to my permanent 
possibility of being-seen-by-him; that is, to the permanent 
possibility that a subject who sees me may be substituted for 
the^ object seen by me. “Being-seen-by-the-Other” is the truth 
of “seeing-the-Other.” Thus the notion of the Other can not 
under any circumstances aim at a solitary, extra-mundane con- 
sciousness which I can not even think. The man is defined 
by his relation to the world and by his relation to myself. He 
is that object in the world which determines an internal flow 
of the universe, an internal hemorrhage. He is the subject 
who is revealed to me in that flight of myself toward objec- 
tivation. But the original relation of myself to the Other is not 
only an absent truth aimed at across the concrete presence of 
an object in my universe; it is also a concrete, daily relation 
which at each instant I experience. At each instant the Other 
IS looking at me. It is easy therefore for us to attempt with 
concrete examples to describe this fundamental connection 
which must form the basis of any theory concerning the 
Uther. If the Other is on principle the one who looks at me. 




THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


347 


of them. This illusion stems from the fact that eyes as objects 
of my perception remain at a precise distance which unfolds 
from me to them (in a word, I am present to the eyes without 
distance, but they are distant from the place where I “find my- 
self”) whereas the look is upon me without distance while at 
the same time it holds me at a distance — that is, its immediate 
presence to me unfolds a distance which removes me from 
it. I can not therefore direct my attention on the look without 
at the same stroke causing my perception to decompose and 
pass into the background. There is produced here something 
analogous to what I attempted to show elsewhere in connec- 
tion with the subject of the imagination.’’’ We can not, I said 
then, perceive and imagine simultaneously; it must be either 
one or the other. I should willingly say here: we can not per- 
ceive the world and at the same time apprehend a look fas- 
tened upon us; it must be either one or the other. This is 
because to perceive is to look at, and to apprehend a look is 
not to apprehend a look-as-object in the world (unless the 
Jook is not directed upon us); it is to be conscious of being 
looked at. The look which the eyes manifest, no matter 
what kind of eyes they are, is a pure reference to myself. What 
I apprehend immediately when I hear the branches crackling 
behind me is not that there is someone there; it is that I am 
vulnerable, that I have a body which can be hurt, that I 
occupy a place and that I can not in any case escape from 
the space in which I am without defense — in short, that I 


am seen. Thus the look is first an intermediary which refers 
from me to myself. What is the nature of this intermediary? 
What does being seen mean for me? 

Let us imagine that moved by jealousy, curiosity, or vice I 
have just glued my ear to the door and looked through a 
keyhole. I am alone and on the level of a non-thetic self-con- 


sciousness. This means first of all that there is no self to in- 
habit my consciousness, nothing therefore to which I can refer 
^y acts in order to qualify them. They are in no way 
nown; I am my acts and hence they carry in themselves their 
Whole justification. I am a pure consciousness of things, and 
lUgs, caught up in the circuit of my selfness, offer to me 
eir potentialities as the proof of my non-thetic consciousness 
w ) my own possibilities. This means that behind that door a 
spectacle is presented as “to be seen,” a conversation as “to 


” t-‘lmaginaire. 1940. 



348 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

be heard.” The door, the keyhole are at once both instru- 
ments and obstacles; they are presented as “to be handled 
with care”; the keyhole is given as “to be looked through close 
by and a little to one side,” etc. Hence from this moment “I 
do what I have to do.” No transcending view comes to confer 
upon my acts the character of a given on which a judgment 
can be brought to bear. My consciousness sticks to my acts, 
it is my acts; and my acts are commanded only by the ends 
to be attained and by the instruments to be employed. My 
attitude, for example, has no “outside”; it is a pure process of 
relating the instrument (the keyhole) to the end to be attained 
(the spectacle to he seen), a pure mode of losing myself in the 
world, of causing myself to be drunk in by things as ink is 
by a blotter in order that an instrumental-complex oriented 
toward an end may he synthetically detached on the ground of 
the world. The order is the reverse of causal order. It is the 
end to be attained which organizes all the moments which 
precede it. The end justifies the means; the means do not 
exist for themselves and outside the end. 

Moreover the ensemble exists only in relation to a free 
project of my possibilities. Jealousy, as the possibility which I 
am, organizes this instrumental complex by transcending it to- 
ward itself. But I am this jealousy; I do not know it. If I 
contemplated it instead of making it, then only the wojldly 
complex in instrumentality could teach it to me. This en- 
semble in the world with its double and inverted determina- 
tion (there is a spectacle to be seen behind the door only be- 
cause I am jealous, but my jealousy is nothing except the 
simple objective fact that there is a sight to he seen behind 
the door) — this we shall call situation. This situation reflects 
to me at once both my facticity and my freedom; on the 
occasion of a certain objective structure of the world which 
surrounds me, it refers my freedom to me in the form of tasks 
to be freely done. There is no constraint here since my free- 
into my possibles and since correlatively the poten- 
tialities of the world indicate and offer only themselves. More- 
over I can not truly define myself as being in a situation: 
first because I am not a positional consciousness of myself; 
second because I am my own nothingness. In this sense — and 
since I am what I am not and since I am not what I am — ^I 
can not even define myself as truly being in the process of 
listening at doors. I escape this provisional definition of my- 
self by means of all my transcendence. There as we have seen 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


349 


is the origin of bad faith. Thus not only am I unable to know 
myself, but my very being escapes — although I am that very 
escape from my being — and I am absolutely nothing. There is 
nothing there but a pure nothingness encircling a certain ob- 
jective ensemble and throwing it into relief outlined upon the 
world, but this ensemble is a real system, a disposition of 
means in view of an end. 

But all of a sudden I hear footsteps in the hall. Someone 
is looking at me! What does this mean? It means that I am 
suddenly affected in my being and that essential modifications 
appear in my structure — modifications which I can apprehend 
and fix conceptually by means of the reflective cogito. 

First of all, I now exist as myself for my unreflective con- 
sciousness. It is this irruption of the self which has been most 
often described: F see myself because somebody sees me — as 
it is usually expressed. This way of putting it is not wholly 
exact. But let us look more carefully. So long as we considered 
the for-itself in its isolation, we were able to maintain that 
the unreflective consciousness can not be inhabited by a self; 
the self was given in the form of an object and only for the 
reflective consciousness. But here the self comes to haunt the 
unreflective consciousness. Now the unreflective consciousness 
is a consciousness of the world. Therefore for the unreflective 
consciousness the self exists on the level of objects in the 
world; this role which devolved only on the reflective con- 
sciousness — ^the making-present of the self — ^belongs now to 
the unreflective consciousness. Only the reflective conscious- 
ness has the self directly for an object. The unreflective con- 
sciousness does not apprehend the person directly or as its ob- 
ject; the person is presented to consciousness in so far as the 
person is an object for the Other. This means that all of a 
sudden I am conscious of myself as escaping myself, not in 
that I am the foundation of my own nothingness but in 
that I have my foundation outside myself. I am for myself 
only as I am a pure reference to the Other. 

Nevertheless we must not conclude here that the object 
is the Other and that the Ego present to my consciousness is a 
secondary structure or a meaning of the Other-as-object; the 
Other is not an object here and can not be an object, as we 
have shown, unless by the same stroke my self ceases to be an 
object-for-the-Other and vanishes. Thus I do not aim at the 
Other as an object nor at my Ego as an object for myself; 
I do not even direct an empty Intention toward that Ego as 



350 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


toward an object presently out of my reach. In fact it is sep- 
arated from me by a nothingness which I can not fill since I 
apprehend it as not being for me and since on principle it 
exists for the Other. Therefore I do not aim at it as if it could 
someday be given me but on the contrary in so far as it on 
principle flees from me and will never belong to me. Never- 
theless I am that Ego; I do not reject it as a strange' image, but 
it is present to me as a self which I am without knowing it; 
for I discover it in shame and, in other instances, in pride. It 
is shame or pride which reveals to me the Other’s look and 
myself at the end of that look. It is the shame or pride which 
makes me live, not know the situation of being looked at. 

Now, shame, as we noted at the beginning of this chapter, 
is shame of self; it is the recognition of the fact that I am in- 
deed that object which the Other is looking at and judging. I 
can be ashamed only as my freedom escapes me in order to 
become a given object. Thus originally the bond between 
my unreflective consciousness and my Ego, which is being 
looked at, is a bond not of knowing but of being. Beyond 
any knowledge which I can have, I am this self which another 
knows. And this self which I am — ^this I am in a world which 
the Other has made alien to me, for the Other’s look embraces 
my being and correlatively the walls, the door, the keyhole. 
AH these instrumental-things, in the midst of which I am, 
now turn toward the Other a face which on principle escapes 
me. Thus I am my Ego for the Other in the midst of a world 
which flows toward the Other. Earlier we were able to call this 
internal hemorrhage the flow of my world toward the Other- 
as-object. This was because the flow of blood was trapped and 
localized by the very fact that I fixed as an object in my world 
that Other toward which this world was bleeding. Thus not a 
^op of blood was lost; all was recovered, surrounded, local- 
ized although in a being which I could not penetrate. Here on 
the contrary the flight is without limit; it is lost externally; the 
world^ flows out of the world and I flow outside myself. The 
Other s look makes me be beyond my being in this world and 
puts me in the midst of the world which is at once this world 
and beyond this world. What sort of relations can I enter into 
With this being which I am and which shame reveals to me? 
, first place there is a relation of being. I am 

tto being. I do not for an instant think of denying it; my 
sname is a confession. I shall be able later to use bad faith so 
as to hide it from myself, but bad faith is also a confession 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


351 


since it is an effort to flee the being which I am. But I am 
this being, neither in the mode of “having to be” nor in that 
of “was”; I do not found it in its being; I can not produce it 
directly. But neither is it the indirect, strict effect of my acts 
as when my shadow on the ground or my reflection in the 
mirror is moved in correlation with the gestures which I 
make. This being which I am preserves a certain indetermina- 
tion, a certain unpredictability. And these new characteristics 
do not come only from the fact that I can not know the Other; 
they stem also and especially from the fact that the Other is 
free. Or to be exact and to reverse the terms, the Other’s 
freedom is revealed to me across the uneasy indetermina- 
tion of the being which I am for him. Thus this being is 
not my possible; it is not always in question at the heart of 
my freedom. On the contrary, it is the limit of my freedom, 
its “backstage” in the sense that we speak of “behind the 
scenes.” It is given to me as a burden which I carry without 
ever being able to turn back to know it, without even being 
able to realize its weight. If it is comparable to my shadow it 
is like a shadow which is projected on a movihg and un- 
predictable material such that no table of reference can be 
provided for calculating the distortions resulting from these 
movements. Yet we still have to do with my being and not 
with an image of my being. We are dealing with my being as 
it is written in and by the Other’s freedom. Everything takes 
place as if I had a dimension of being from which I was sep- 
arated by a radical nothingness; and this nothingness is the 
Other’s freedom. The Other has to make my being-for-him be 
in so far as he has to be his being. Thus each of my free 
conducts engages me in a new environment where the very 
stuff of my being is the unpredictable freedom of another. 
Yet by my very shame I claim as mine that freedom of an- 
other, I affirm a profound unity of consciousness, not that 
harmony of monads which has sometimes been taken as a 
guarantee of objectivity but a unity of being; for I accept and 
wish that others should confer upon me a being which I rec- 
ognize. 

Shame reveals to me that I am this being, not in the mode 
of “was” or of “having to be” but in-itself. When I am 
alone, I can not realize my “being-seated”; at most it can be 
said that I simultaneously both am it and am not it. But in 
order for me to be what I am, it suffices merely that the Other 
look at me. It is not for myself, to be sure; I myself shall 



352 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

never succeed at realizing this being-seated which I grasp in 
the Other’s look, I shall remain forever a consciousness. But 
it is for the Other. Once more the nihilating escape of the 
for-itself is fixed, once more the in-itself closes in upon the 
for-itself. But once more this metamorphosis is effected at a 
distance. For the Other I am seated as this inkwell is on the 
table; for the Other, I am leaning over the keyhole as 
this tree is bent by the wind. Thus for the Other I have 
stripped myself of transcendence. This is because my tran- 
scendence becomes for whoever makes himself a witness of it 
(Le., determines himself as not being my transcendence) a 
purely established transcendence, a given-transcendence; that 
is, it acquires a nature by the sole fact that the Other confers 
on it an outside. This is accomplished, not by any distortion or 
by a refraction which the Other would impose on my transcen- 
dence through his categories, but by his very being. If there is 
an Other, whatever or whoever he may be, whatever may be 
his relations with me, and without his acting upon me in 
any way except by the pure upsurge of his being — then I 
have an outside, I have a nature. My original fall is the exis- 
tence of the Other. Shame — ^like pride — is the apprehension of 
myself as a nature although that very nature escapes me and 
is unknowable as such. Strictly speaking, it is not that I per- 
ceive myself losing my freedom in order to become a thing, 
but my nature is — over there, outside my lived freedom — 
as a given attribute of this being which I am for the Other. 

I grasp the Other’s look at the very center of my act as the 
solidification and alienation of my own possibilities. In fear or 
in anxious or prudent anticipation, I perceive that these possi- 
bilities which I am and which are the condition of my tran- 
scendence are given also to another, given as about to be tran- 
scended in turn by his own possibilities. The Other as a look 
is only that — my transcendence transcended. Of course I 
still am my possibilities in the mode of non-thetic conscious- 
n^s (of) these possibilities. But at the same time the look 
alienates them from me. Hitherto I grasped these possibil- 
ities thetically on the world and in the world in the form of 
the potentialities of instruments: the dark corner in the hall- 
way referred to me the possibility of hiding — as a simple 
potential quality of its shadow, as the invitation of its dark- 
ness. This quality or instrumentality of the object belonged 
to it alone and was given as an objective, ideal property mark- 
ing its real belonging to that complex which we have called 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


353 


situation. But with the Other’s look a new organization of 
complexes comes to superimpose itself on the first. To ap- 
prehend myself as seen is, in fact, to apprehend myself as seen 
in the world and from the standpoint of the world. The look 
does not carve me out in the universe; it comes to search for 
me at the heart of my situation and grasps me only in irre- 
solvable relations with instruments. If I am seen as seated, I 
must be seen as “seated-on-a-chair,” if I am grasped as bent 
over, it is as “bent-over-the-keyhole,” etc. But suddenly the 
alienation of myself, which is the act of being-looked-at, in- 
volves the alienation of the world which I organize. I am seen 
as seated on this chair with the result that I do not see it at 
all, that it is impossible for me to see it, that it escapes me so 
as to organize itself into a new and differently oriented com- 
plex — ^with other relations and other distances in the midst 
of other objects which similarly have for me a secret face. 

Thus I, who in so far as I am my possibles, am what I 
am not and am not what I am — ^behold now I am some- 
body! And the one who I am — and who on principle es- 
capes me — am he in the midst of the world in so far as 
he escapes me. Due to this fact my relation to an object or 
the potentiality of an object decomposes under the Other’s 
look and appears to me in the world as my possibility of 
utilizing the object, but only as this possibility on principle 


escapes me; that is, in so far as it is surpassed by the Other 
toward his own possibilities. For example, the potentiality of 
the dark corner becomes a given possibility of hiding in the 
corner by the sole fact that the Other^® can pass beyond it to- 


ward his possibility of illuminating the corner with his flash- 
light. This possibility is there, and I apprehend it but as 
absent, as in the Other; I apprehend it through my anguish 
and through my decision to give up that hiding place which is 
too risky." Thus my possibilities are present to my unreflec- 
tive consciousness in so far as the Other is watching me. K I 
see him ready for anything, his hand in his pocket where he 
has a weapon, his finger placed on the electric bell and ready 
at the slightest movement on my part” to call the police, I 
apprehend my possibilities from outside and through him at 
the same time that I am my possibilities, somewhat as we 
objectively apprehend our thought through language at the 
same time that we think it in order to express it in language. 


’®Tr. The French has Vauteur, “the author,” which I feel sure must be a 
misprint for 1‘autrul, “the Other.” 



354 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

This inclination to run away, which dominates me and carries 
me along and which I am — this I read in the Other’s watch- 
ful look and in that other look — ^the gun pointed at me. The 
Other apprehends this inclination in me in so far as he has 
anticipated it and is already prepared for it. He apprehends it 
in me in so far as he surpasses it and disarms it. But I do 
not grasp the actual surpassing; I grasp simply the death of 
my possibility. A subtle death: for my possibility of hiding 
stUl remains my possibility; inasmuch as I am it, it still lives; 
and the dark corner does not cease to signal me, to refer its 
potentiality to me. But if instrumentality is defined as the fact 

of “being able to be surpassed toward then my very 

possibility becomes an instrumentality. My possibility of 
hiding in the comer becomes the fact that the Other can sur- 
pass it toward his possibility of pulling me out of conceal- 
ment, of identifying me, of arresting me. For the Other my 
possibility is at once an obstacle and a means as all instru- 
ments are. It is an obstacle, for it will compel him to certain 
new acts (to advance toward me, to turn on his flashlight). 
It is a means, for once I am discovered in this cul-de-sac, 
I “am caught.” In other words every act performed against 
the Other can on principle be for the Otlier an instru- 
ment which will serve him against me. And I grasp the 
Other not in the clear vision of what he can make out of my 
act but in a fear which lives all my possibilities as ambiva- 
lent. The Other is the hidden death of my possibilities in 
so far as I live that death as hidden in the midst of the 
world. The connection between my possibility and the in- 
strument is no more than between two instruments which 
are adjusted to each other outside in view of an end which 
escapes me. Both the obscurity of the dark comer and my 
possibility of hiding there are surpassed by the Other when, 
before I have been able to make a move to take refuge there, 
he throws the light on the corner. Thus in the shock which 
seizes me when I apprehend the Other’s look, this happens 
^ suddenly I experience a subtle alienation of alt my 
possibilities, which are now associated with objects of the 
world, far from me in the midst of the world. 

Two important consequences result. The first is that my 
possibility becomes a probability which is outside me. In so 
far as the Other grasps it as eaten away by a freedom which 
e IS not, in so far as he makes himself a witness of it and cal- 
cu ates its results, it is a pure indetermination in the game of 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


355 


' possibles, and it is precisely thus that I guess at it. Later when 
we are in direct connection with the Other by language and 
when we gradually learn what he thinks of us, this is the 
thing which will be able at once to fascinate us and fill us 
with horror. 

“I swear to you that I will do it.” 

“Maybe so. You tell me so. I want to believe you. It is in- 
deed possible that you will do it.” 

The sense of this dialogue implies that the Other is origi- 
nally placed before my freedom as before a given property 
of indetermination and before my possibles as before my 
probables. This is because originally I perceive myself to be 
over there for the Other, and this phantom-outline of my 
being touches me to the heart. For in shame and anger and 
fear I do not cease to assume myself as such. Yet I assume 
myself in blindness since I do not know what I assume. I 
simply am it. 

On the other hand, the ensemble “instrument-possibility,” 
made up of myself confronting the instrument, appears to me 
as surpassed and organized into a world by the Other. With 
the Other’s look the “situation” escapes me. To use an every- 
day expression which better expresses our thought, I am no 
longer master of the situation. Or more exactly, I remain 
master of it, but it has one real dimension by which it escapes 
me, by which unforeseen reversals cause it to be otherwise 
than it appears for me. To be sure it can happen that in 
strict solitude I perform an act whose consequences are com- 
pletely opposed to my anticipations and to my desires; for 
example I gently draw toward me a small platform holding 
this fragile vase, but this movement results in tipping over a 
bronze statuette which breaks the vase into a thousand pieces. 
-Here, however, there is nothing which I could not have fore- 
seen if I had been more careful, if I had observed the 
arrangement of the objects, etc. — nothing which on principle 
escapes me. The appearance of the Other, on the contrary, 
causes the appearance in the situation of an aspect which I did 
not wish, of which I am not master, and which on principle 
escapes me since it is for the Other. This is what Gide has 
appropriately called “the devil’s part.” It is the unpredictable 
but still real reverse side. 

It is this unpredictability which Kafka’s art attempts to 
describe in The Trial and The Castle. In one sense, every- 
thing which the Surveyor are doing belong" ^',,to 



358 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

As a temporal-spatial object in the world, as an essential 
structure of a temporal-spatial situation in the world, I offer 
myself to the Other ' appraisal. This also I apprehend by the 
pure exercise of the cogito. To be looked at is to apprehend 
oneself as the unknown object of unknowable appraisals — in 
particular, of value judgments. But at the same time that in 
shame or pride I recognize the justice of these appraisals, I 
do not cease to tak«. them for what they are — a free surpassing 
of the given toward possibilities. A judgment is the tran- 
scendental act of a free being. Thus being-seen constitutes 
me as a defenseless being for a freedom which is not my 
freedom. It is in this sense that we can consider ourselves as 
“slaves” in so far as we appear to the Other. But this slavery 
is not a historical result -capable of being surmounted — of a 
life in the abstract form of consciousness. I am a slave to the 
degree that my being is dependent at the center of a freedom 
which is not mine and which is the very condition of my 
being. In so far as I am the object of values which come to 
qualify me without my being able to act on this qualification 
or even to know it, T am enslaved. By the same token in so far 
as I am the instrument of possibilities which are not my possi- 
bilities, whose pure presence beyond my being I can not even 
glimpse, and which deny my transcendence in order to con- 
stitute me as a means to ends of which I am ignorant — am 
in danger. This danger is not an accident but the permanent 
structure of my heinv-for-others. 

This brings us to the end of our description. Yet before 
we can make use of it to discover just what the Other, is, we 
must note that this description has been worked out entirely 
iOn the level of the cogito. We have only made explicit the 
.meaning of those subjective reactions to the Other’s look 
which are fear (the feeling of being in danger before the 
Other’s freedom), pride, or shame (the feeling of bemg 
finally what I am but elsewhere, over there for the Other), 
the recognition of my slavery (the feeling of the alienation of 
all my possibilities). In addition this specification is not 
merely a conceptual fixing of bits of knowledge more or less 
obscure. Let each one refer to his own experience. There is no 
one who has not at some time been surprised in an attitude 
which was guilty or simply ridiculous. The abrupt modifica- 
tion then experienced was in no way provoked by the irrup- 
tion of knowledge. It is rather in itself a solidification and an 
abrupt stratification of myself which leaves intact my possi- 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


359 


bilities and my structures “for-myself,” but which suddenly 
pushes me into a new dimension of existence — the dimension 
of the unrevealed. Thus the appearance of the look is appre- 
hended by me as the upsurge of an ekstatic relation of being, 
of which one term is the “me” as for-itself which is what it is 
not and which is not what it is, and of which the other term 
is still the “me” but outside my reach, outside my action, out- 
side my knowledge. This term, since it is directly connected 
with the infinite possibilities of a free Other, is itself an in- 
finite and inexhaustible synthesis of unrevealed properties. 
Through the Other’s look I live myself as fixed in the midst of 
the world, as in danger, as irremediable. But I know neither 
what I am nor what is my place in the world, nor what face 
this world in which I am turns toward the Other. 

Now at last we can make precise the meaning of this up- 
surge of the Other in and through his look. The Other is in 
no way given to us as an object. The objectivation of the 
^ Other would be the collapse of his being-as-a-look. Further- 
more as we have seen, the Other’s look is the disappearance of 
the Other’s eyes as objects which manifest the look. The 
Other can not even be the object aimed at emptily at the 
horizon of my being for the Other. The objectivation of the 
Other, as we shall see, is a defense on the part of my being 
which, precisely by conferring on the Other a being for-me, 
frees me from my being-for the Other. In the phenomenon 
of the look, the Other is on principle that which can not be 
an object. At the same time we see that he can not be a limit- 
ing term of that relation of myself to myself which makes 
me arise for myself as the unrevealed. Neither can the Other 
be the goal of my attention; if in the upsurge of the Other’s 
look, I paid attention to the look or to the Other, this could 
be only as to objects, for attention is an intentional direction 
toward objects. But it is not necessary to conclude that the 
Other is an abstract condition, a conceptual structure of the 
ekstatic relation; there is here in fact no object really thought, 
of which the Other could be a universal, formal structure. The 
Other is, to be sure, the condition of my being-unrevealed. 
But he is the concrete, particular condition of it. He is not 
engaged in my being in the midst of the world as one of its 
integral parts since he is precisely that which transcends this 
world in the midst of which I am as non-revealed; as such he 
can therefore be neither an object nor the formal, constituent 
element of an object. He can not appear to me, as we have 



360 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

seen, as a unifying or regulative category of my experience 
since he comes to me through an encounter. Then what is the 
Other? 

In the first place, he is the being toward whom I do not 
turn my attention. He is the one who looks at me and at 
whom I am not yet looking, the one who delivers me to my- 
self as unrevealed but without revealing himself, the one 
who is present to me as directing at me but never as the ob- 
ject of my direction; he is the concrete pole (though out of 
reach) of my flight, of the alienation of my possibles, and 
of the flow of the world toward another world which is 
the same world and yet lacks all communication with it 
But he can not be distinct from this same alienation and 
flow; he is the meaning and the direction of them; he haunts 
this flow not as a real or categorical element but as a presence 
which is fixed and made part of the world if I attempt to 
“make-it-present” and which is never more present, more 
urgent than when I am not aware of it. For example if I am 
wholly engulfed in my shame, the Other is the immense, in- 
visible presence which supports this shame and embraces it 
on every side; he is the supporting environment of my be- 
ing-unrevealed. Let us see what it is which the Other mani- 
fests as unrevealable across my lived experience of the un- 
revealed. 

First, the Other's look as the necessary condition of my 
objectivity is the destruction of all objectivity for me. The 
Other’s look touches me across the world and is not only a 
transformation of myself but a total metamorphosis of the 
world. I am looked-at in a world which is looked-at. In par- 
ticular the Other’s look, which is a look-looking and not a 
look-looked-at, denies mv distances from objects and unfolds 
its own distances. This look of the Other is given immedi- 
ately as that by which distance comes to the world at the 
heart of a presence without distance. I withdraw; I am 
stripped of my distanceless presence to my world, and I am 
provided with a distance from the Other. There I am fifteen 
paces from the door, six yards from the window. But the 
Other comes searching for me so as to constitute me at a 
certain distance from him. A& the Other constitutes me as at 
six yards from him, it is necessary that he be present to me 
without distance. Thus within the very experience of my 
distance from things and from the Other, I experience the 
distanceless presence of the Other to me. 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


361 


Anyone may recognize in this abstract description that im- 
mediate and burning presence of the Other’s look which has 
so -often filled him with shame. In other words, in so far as 
I experience myself as looked-at, there is realized for me a 
trans-mundane presence of the Other. The Other looks at 
me not as he is “in the midst of’ my world but as he comes 
toward the world and toward me from all his transcendence; 
when he looks at me, he is separated from me by no dis- 
tance, by no object of the world — ^whether real or ideal — ^by 
no body in the world, but by the sole fact of his nature as 
Other. Thus the appearance of the Other’s look is not an ap- 
pearance in the world — ^neither in “mine” nor in the “Oth- 
er’s” — and the relation which unites me to the Other cannot 
be a relation of exteriority inside the- world. By the Other’s 
look I effect the concrete proof that there is a “beyond the 
world.” The Other is present to me without any intermedi- 
ary as a transcendence which is not mine. But lids presence 
is not reciprocal. All of the world’s density is necessary in 
order that I may myself be present to the Other. An omni- 
present and inapprehensible transcendence, posited upon me 
without intermediary as I am my being-unrevealed, a tran- 
scendence separated from me by the infinity of being, as I 
am plunged by this look into the heart of a world complete 
with its distances and its instruments — such is the Other’s 
look when first I experience it as a look. 

Furthermore by fixing my possibilities the Other reveals 
to me the impossibility of my being an object except for an- 
other freedom. I can not be an object for myself, for I am 
what I am; thrown back on its own resources, the reflective 
effort toward a dissociation results in failure; I am always- 
reapprehended by myself. And when I naively assume that 
it is possible for me to be an objective being without being 
responsible for it, I thereby implicitly suppose the Other’s 
existence; for how could I be an object if not for a subject? 
Thus for ine the Other is first the being for whom I am an 
object; that is, the being through whom I gain my object- 
ness. If I am to be able to conceive of even one of my prop- 
erties in the objective mode, then the Other is already given. 
He is given not as a being of my universe but as a pure sub- 
ject. Thus this pure subject which by definition I am unable 
to know — z.e., to posit as object — ^is always there out of 
reach and without distance whenever I try to grasp myself 
as object. In experiencing the look, in experiencing myself 



362 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

as an unrevealed object-ness, I experience the inapprehensi- 
ble subjectivity of the Other directly and with my being. 

At the same time I experience the Other’s infinite freedom. 
It is for and by means of a freedom and only for and by 
means of it that my possibles can be limited and fixed. A 
material obstacle can not fix my possibilities; it is only the 
occasion for my projecting myself toward other possibles and 
can not confer upon them an outside. To remain at home 
because it is raining and to remain at home because one has 
been forbidden to go out are by no means the same thing. 
In the 'first case I myself determine to stay inside in con- 
sideration of the consequences of my acts; I surpass the ob- 
stacle “rain” toward myself and I make an instrument of it. 
In the second case it is my very possibilities of going out or 
of staying inside which are presented to me as surpassed and 
fixed and which a freedom simultaneously foresees and pre- 
vents. It is not mere caprice which causes us often to do very 
natimally and without annoyance what would irritate us if 
another commanded it. This is because the order and the 
prohibition cause us to experience the Other’s freedom across 
our own slavery. Thus in the look the death of my possibili- 
ties causes me to experience the Other’s freedom. This death 
is realized only at the heart of that freedom; I am inacces- 
sible to myselJf and yet myself, thrown, abandoned at the 
heart of the Other’s freedom. In connection with this ex- 
perience my belonging to universal time can appear to me 
only as contained and realized by an autonomous tempo- 
ralization; only a for-itself which temporalizes itself can 
throw me into time. 

Thus through the look I experience the Other concretely 
as a free, conscious subject who causes there to be a world 
by temporalizing himself toward his own possibilities. That 
subject’s presence without intermediary is the necessary con- 
dition of all thought which I would attempt to form con- 
cernmg myself. The Other is that “myself” from which 
nothing separates me, absolutely nothing except his pure and 
total freedom; that is, that indetermination of himself which 
he has to be for and through himself. 

We know enough at present to attempt to explain that 
unshakable resistance which common sense has always op- 
posed to the solipsistic argument. This resistance indeed is 
ased on the fact that the Other is given to me as a concrete 
evident presence which I can in no way derive from myself 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


363 


and which can in no way be placed in doubt nor made the 
object of a phenomenological reduction or of any other 

f ^ 1 Q 

e-n-oxV’ 

If someone looks at me, I am conscious of being an ob- 
ject. But this consciousness can be produced only in and 
through the existence of the Other. In this respect Hegel 
was right. However that other consciousness and that other 
freedom are never given to me; for if they were, they would 
be known and would therefore be an object, which would 
cause me to, cease being an object. Neither can I derive the 
concept or the representation of them from my own back- 
ground. First because I do not “conceive” them nor “repre- 
sent” them to myself; expressions like these would refer us 
again to “knowing,” which on principle is removed from 
consideration. In addition this concrete proof of freedom 
which I can effect by myself is the proof of my freedom; 
every concrete apprehension of a consciousness is conscious- 
ness (of) my consciousness; the very notion of consciousness 
makes reference only to my possible conlsciousness. Indeed 
we established in our Introduction that the existence of 
freedom and of consciousness precedes and conditions their 
essence; consequently these essences can subsume only con- 
crete exemplifications of my consciousness or of my freedom. 
In the third place the Other’s freedom and consciousness 
can not be categories serving for the unification of my rep- 
resentations. To be sure, as Husserl has shown, the ontologi- 
cal structure of “my” world demands that it be also a world 
for others. But to the extent that the Other confers a par- 
ticular type of objectivity on the objects of my world, this 
is because he is already in this world in the capacity of an 
object. If it is correct that Pierre, who is reading before me, 
gives a particular type of objectivity to the face of the book 
which is turned toward him, then this objectivity is con- 
ferred on a face which on principle I can see (although as 
we have said, it escapes me in so far as it is read), on a face 
which belongs to the world where I am and which conse- 
quently by a magic bond is connected beyond distance to 
Pierre-as-object. Under these conditions the concept of the 
Other can in fact be fixed as an empty form and employed 
constantly as a reinforcement of objectivity for the world 
which is mine. But the Other’s presence in his look-looking 
can not contribute to reinforce the world, for on the con- 

*®Tr. Correction for eVoxv. 



364 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

trary it undoes the world by the very fact that it causes the 
world to escape me. The escape of the world from me when 
it is relative and when it is an escape toward the Other-as- 
object, reinforces objectivity. The escape of the world and 
of my self from me when it is absolute and when it is ef- 
fected toward a freedom which is not mine, is a dissolution 
of my knowledge. The world disintegrates in order to be 
reintegrated over there as a world; but this disintegration is 
not given to me; I can not know it nor even think it. The 
presence to me of the Other-as-a-look is therefore neither a 
knowledge nor a projection of my being nor a form of unifi- 
cation nor a category. It is and I can not derive it from me. 

At the same time I can not make it fall beneath the stroke 
of the phenomenological eiroxh' latter indeed has for 
its goal putting the world within brackets so as to reveal 
transcendental consciousness in its absolute reality. Whether 
in general this operation is possible or not is something 
which is not for us to decide here. But in the case which 
concerns us the Other can not be put out of consideration 
since as a look-looking he definitely does not belong to the 
world. 1 am ashamed of myself before the Other, we said. 
The phenomenological reduction must result in removing 
from consideration the object of shame in order better to 
make shame itself stand out in its absolute subjectivity. But 
the Other is not the object of the shame; the object is my 
act or my situation in the world. They alone can be strictly 
“reduced.” The Other is not even an objective condition of 
my shame. Yet he is as the very-being of it. Shame is the 
revelation of the Other not in the way in which a conscious- 
ness reveals an object but in the way in which one moment 
of consciousness implies on the side another moment as its 
motivation. If we should have attained pure consciousness 
by means of the cogito, and if this pure consciousness were 
only a consciousness (of being) shame, "the Other’s con- 
sciousness would still haunt it as an inapprehensible pres- 
ence and would thereby escape all reduction. This demon- 
strates sufficiently that it is not in the world that the Other 
is first to be sought but at the side of consciousness as a con- 
sciousness in which and by which consciousness makes itself 
be what it is. Just as my consciousness apprehended by the 
cogito bears indubitable witness of itself and of its own ex- 
istence, so certain particular consciousnesses — ^for example. 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 365 

“shame-consciousness” — ^bear indubitable witness to the cogito 
both of themselves and of the existence of the Other. 

But, someone may object, is this not simply because of the 
Other’s look as meaning of my objectivity-for-myself? If so, 
we shall fall back into solipsism; when I integrate myself as 
an object in the concrete system of representations, the mean- 
ing of this objectivation would be projected outside me and 
hypostasized as the Other. 

But we must note the following: 

(1) My object-ness for myself is in no way a specification 
of Hegel’s Ich bin Ich. We are not dealing with a formal 
identity, and my being-as-object or being-for-others is pro- 
foundly different from my being-for-myself. In fact the no- 
tion of objectivity, as we observed in Part One, requires an 
explicit negation. The object is that which is not my con- 
sciousness; consequently it is that which does not have the 
characteristics of consciousness since the only existent which 
has for me the characteristics of consciousness is the con- 
sciousness which is mine. Thus the Me-as-object-for-myself 
is a Me which is not Me; that is, which does not have the 
characteristics of consciousness. It is a degraded conscious- 
ness; objectivation is a radical metamorphosis. Even if I 
could see myself clearly and distinctly as an object, what I 
should see would not be the adequate representation of what 
I am in myself and for myself, of that “incomparable mon- 
ster preferable to all else,” as Malraux puts it, but the appre- 
hension of my being-outside-myself, for the Other; that is, the 
objective apprehension of my being-other, which is radically 
different from my being-for-myself, and which does not refer 
to myself at all. 

To apprehend myself as evil, for example, could not be to 
refer myself to what I am for myself, for I am not and can 
not be evil for myself for two reasons. In the first place, I 
am not evil any more than I aw a civil servant or a physician. 
In fact I am in the mode of not being what I am and of being 
what I am not. The qualification “evil,” on the contrary, 
characterizes me as an in-itself. In the second place, if I were 
to be evil for myself, I should of necessity be so in the 
mode of having to be so and would have to apprehend myself 
and will myself as evil. But this would mean that I must dis- 
cover myself as willing what appears to myself as the opposite 
of my Good and precisely because it is the Evil or the opposite 
of my Good. It is therefore expressly necessary that I will the 



366 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


contrary of what I desire at one and the same moment and in 
the same relation; that is, I would have to hate myself pre- 
cisely as I am myself. K on the level of the for-itself I am to 
realize fully this essence of evil, it would be necessary for me 
to assume myself as evil; that is, I would have to approve my- 
self by the same act which makes me blame myself. We can see 
that tills notion of evil can in no way derive its origin from 
me in so far as I am Me. It would be in vain for me to push the 
ekstasis to its extreme limits or to effect a detachment from 
self which would constitute me for myself; I shall never 
succeed in conferring evil on myself or even in conceiving it 
for myself if I am thrown on my own resources. 

This is because I am my own detachment. I am my own 
nothingness; simply because I am my own mediator between 
Me and Me, all objectivity disappears. I can not be this 
nothingness which separates me from me-as-object, for there 
must of necessity be a presentation to me of the object which 
I am. Thus I can not confer on myself any quality without 
mediation or an objectifying power which is not my own 
power and which I can neither pretend nor forge. Of course 
this has been said before; it was said a long time ago that the 
Other teaches me who I am. But the same people who uphold 
this thesis affirm on the other hand that I derive the concept 
of the Other from myself by reflecting on my own powers and 
by projection or analogy. Therefore they remain at the center 
of a vicious circle from which they can not get out. Actually 
the Other can not be the meaning of my objectivity; he is the 
concrete, transcending condition of it. This is because such 
qualities as “evil,” “jealous,” ‘‘sympathetic” or “antipathetic” 
and the like are not empty imaginings; when I use them to 
qualify the Other, I am well aware that I want to touch him 
in his being. Yet I can not live them as, my own realities. If 
the Other confers them on me, they are admitted by what I 
am for-myself; when the Other describes my character, I do 
not “recognize” myself and yet I know that “it is me.” I ac- 
cept the responsibility for this stranger who is presented to 
me, but he does not cease to be a stranger. This is because he 
IS neither a simple unification of my subjective representa- 
tions, not a “Me” which I am in the sense of the Ich bin Ich, 
nor an empty image which the Other makes of me for himself 
u' which he alone bears the responsibility. This Me, 
compared to the Me which I have to be, is 
s Me but metamorphosed by a new setting and adapted to 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


367 


that setting; it is a being, my being but with entirely new' 
dimensions of being and new modalities. It is Me separated 
from Me by an impassable nothingness, for I am this me but 
I am not this nothingness which separates me from myself. It 
is the Me which I am by an ultimate ekstasis which transcends 
all my ekstases since it is not the ekstasis which I have to be. 
My being for-others is a fall through absolute emptiness to- 
ward objectivity. And since this fall is an alienation, I can 
not make myself be for myself as an object; for in no case can 
I ever alienate myself from myself. 

(2) Furthermore the Other does not constitute me as an 
object for myself but for him. In other words he does not 
serve as a regulative or constitutive concept for the pieces of 
knowledge which I may have of myself. Therefore the' 
Other’s presence does not cause me-as-object to “appear.” I 

apprehend nothing but an escape from myself toward . 

Even when language has revealed that the Other considers me 
evU or jealous, I shall never have a concrete intuition of my 
evil or of my jealousy. These will never be more than fleeting 
notions whose very nature will be to escape me. I shall not 
apprehend my evil, but in relation to this or that particular 
act I shall escape myself, I shall feel my alienation or my flow 
toward ... a being which I shall only be able to think 
emptily as evil and which nevertheless I shall feel that I am, 
which I shall live at a distance through shame or fear. 

Thus myself-as-object is neither knowledge nor a unity of 
knowledge but an uneasiness, a lived wrenching away from 
the ekstatic unity of the for-itself, a limit which I can not 
reach and which yet I am. The Other through whom this Me 
comes to me is neither knowledge nor category but the fact 
of the presence of a strange freedom. In fact ray wrenching 
away from myself and the upsiu-ge of the Other’s freedom 
are one; I can feel them and live them only as an ensemble; I 
can not even try to conceive of one without the other. The 
fact of the Other is incontestable and touches me to the 
heart. I realize him through uneasiness; through him I am 
peipetually in danger in a world which is this world and 
which nevertheless I can only glimpse. The Other does not 
appear to me as a being who is constituted first so as to en- 
counter me later; he appears as a being who arises in an 
onginal relation of being with me and whose indubitability 
and factual necessity are those of my own consciousness. 

A number of difficulties remain. In particular there is the 



368 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

fact that through shame we confer on the Other an indubi- 
table presence. Now as we have seen, it is only probable that 
the Other is looking at me. That farm at the top of the hill 
seems to be looking at the commandos, and it is certain that 
the house is occupied by the enemy. But it is not certain that 
the enemy soldiers are at present watching through the win- 
dows. It is not certain that the man whose footstep I hear be- 
hind me is looking at me; his face could be turned away, his 
look fixed on the ground or on a book. Finally in general it is 
not sure that those eyes which are fixed on me are eyes; 
they could be only “artificial ones” resembling real eyes. In 
short must we not say that in turn the look becomes probable 
because of the fact that I can constantly believe that I am 
looked-at without actually being so? As a result does not our 
certainty of the Other’s existence take on a purely hypothetical 
character? 

The difficulty can be expressed in these terms; On the 
occasion of certain appearances in the world which seem to 
me to manifest a look, I apprehend in myself a certain “being- 
looked-at” with its own structures which refer me to the 
Other’s real existence. But it is possible that I am mistaken; 
perhaps the objects of the world which I took for eyes were 
not eyes; perhaps it was only the wind which shook the bush 
behind me; in short perhaps these concrete objects did not 
really manifest a look. In this case what becomes of my cer- 
tainty that I am looked-at? My shame was in fact shame 
before somebody. But nobody is there. Does it not thereby 
become shame before nobody? Since it has posited somebody 
where there was nobody, does it not become a false shame? 

This difficulty should not deter us for long, and we 
should not even have mentioned it except that actually it can 
help us in our investigation by indicating more purely the 
nature of our being-for-others. There is indeed a confusion 
here between two distinct orders of knowledge and two types 
of being which can not be compared. We have always known 
that the object-in-the-world can be only probable. This is 
due to its very character as object. It is probable that the 
passerby is a man; if he turns his eyes toward me, then al- 
ffiough I immediately experience and with certainty the fact of 
being-Iooked-at, I can not make this certainty pass into my 
experience of the Other-as-object. In fact it reveals to me only 
^ ^ Other-as-subject, a transcending presence to the world 
an the real condition of my being-as-object. In every causal 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


369 


state, therefore, it is impossible to transfer my certainty of 
the Other-as-subject to the Other-as-object which was the 
occasion of that certainty, and conversely it is impossible to 
invalidate the evidence of the appearance of the Other-as-sub- 
ject by pointing to the constitutional probability of the Other- 
as-object. Better yet, the look, as we have shown, appears on 
the ground of the destruction of the object which manifests 
it. If this gross and ugly passerby shuffling along toward me 
suddenly looks at me, then there is nothing left of his ugli- 
ness, his obesity, and his shuffling. During the time that I 
feel myself looked-at he is a pure mediating freedom be- 
tween myself and me. The fact of being-looked-at can not 
therefore depend on the object which manifests the look. 
Since my shame as an Erlebnis which is reflectively apprehen- 
sible is a witness for the Other for the same reason as it is its 
own witness, I am not going to put it in question on the 
occasion of an object of the world which can on principle be 
placed in doubt. This would amount to doubting my own 
existence, for the perceptions which I have of my own body 
(when I see my hand, for example) are subject to error. 
Therefore if the act of being-Iooked-at, in its pure form, is not 
bound to the Other’s body any more than in the pure realiza- 
tion of the cogito my consciousness of being a consciousness 
is bound to my own body, then we must consider the ap- 
pearance of certain objects in the field of my experience — 
in particular the convergence of the Other’s eyes in my direc- 
tion- — as a pure monition, as the pure occasion of realizing 
my being-looked-at. In the same way for a Platonist the con- 
tradictions of the sensible world are the occasion of effecting 
a philosophical conversion. In a word what is certain is that 
/ am looked-at; what is only probable is that the look is bound 
to this or that intra-mundane presence. Moreover there is 
nothing here to surprise us since as we have seen, it is never 
eyes which look at us; it is the Other-as-subject. 

Nevertheless, someone will say, the fact remains that I 
can discover that I have been mistaken. Here I am bent over 
the keyhole; suddenly I hear a footstep, I shudder as a wave 
of shame sweeps over me. Somebody has seen me. I straighten 
tip. My eyes run over the deserted corridor. It was a false 
alarm. I breathe a sigh of relief. Do we not have here an ex- 
perience which is self-destructive? 

Let us look more carefully. Is it actually my being-as-ob- 
ject for the Other which has been revealed as an error? By 



370 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


no means. The Other’s existence is so far from being placed 
in doubt that this false alarm can very well result in making 
me give up my enterprise. If, on the other hand, I persevere in 
it, I shall feel my heart beat fast, and I shall detect the 
slightest noise, the slightest creaking of the stairs. Far from 
disappearing with my first alarm, the Other is present every- 
where, below me, above me, in the neighboring rooms, and I 
continue to feel profoundly my being-for-others. It is even 
possible that my sha -le may not disappear; it is my red face 
as I bend over the keyhole. I do not cease to experience 
my being-for-others; my possibilities do not cease to “^e,” nor 
do the distances cease to unfold toward me in terms of the 
stairway where somebody “could” be, in terms of this dark 
comer where a human presence “could” hide. Better yet, if 
I tremble at the sUghte.st noise, if each creak announces to me 
a look, this is because I am already in the state of being- 
looked-at. What then is it which falsely appeared and which 
was self-destructive when I discovered the false alarm? It is 
not the Other-as-subject, nor is it his presence to me. It is 
the Other’s facticity; that is, the contingent connection be- 
tween the Other and an object-being in my world. Thus what 
is doubtful is not the Other himself. It is the Other’s being- 
there; i.e., that concrete, historical event which we can express 
by the words, “There is someone in this room.” 

These observations may enable us to proceed further. The 
Other’s presence in the world can not be derived analytically 
frorn the presence of the Other-as-subject to me, for this 
original presence is transcendent — i.e., being-beyond-the- 
world. I believed that the Other was present in the room, 
but I was mistaken. He was not there. He was “absent.” 
What then is absence? 

If we take the expression “absence” in its empirical and 
everyday usage, it is clear that I do not use it to indicate just 
any kind of “not-being-there.” In the first place, if I do 
not find iny package of tobacco in its usual spot, I do not 
say that it is absent even though I could declare that it 
ought to be there.” This is because the place of a material 
object or of an instrument, even though sometimes ‘it may be 
precisely ^signed, does not derive from the nature of the 
object or instrument. To be exact, its nature can barely be- 
stow on it a location but it is through me that the place of an 
instrument is realized. Human-reality is the being which 
causes a place to come to objects. Human reality alone, in so 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


371 


far as it is its own possibilities, can originally take a place. On 
the other hand I shall not say that Aga-Khan or the Sultan of 
Morocco is absent from this apartment, but I say that Pierre, 
who usually lives here, is absent for a quarter of an hour. In 
short, absence is defined as a mode of being of human-reality 
in relation to locations and places which it has itself deter- 
mined by its presence. Absence is not a nothingness of con- 
nections with a place; on the contrary, I determine Pierre in 
relation to a determined place by declaring that he is absent 
from it. Finally I shall not speak of Pierre’s absence in relation 
to a natural location even if he often passes by there. On the 
other hand, I shall be able to lament his absence from a picnic 
which “took place” in a part of the country where he has 
never been. Pierre’s absence is defined in relation to a place 
where he might himself determine himself to be, but this 
place itself is delimited as a place, not by the site nor even by 
the solitary relations of the location to Pierre himself, but 
by the presence of other human-realities. It is in relation to 
other people that Pierre is absent. Absence is Pierre’s concrete 
mode of being in relation to Therese; it is a bond between hu- 
man-realities, not between human-reality and the world. It 
is in relation to Therese that Pierre is absent from this lo- 
cation. Absence therefore is a bond of being between two 
or several human-realities which necessitates a fundamen- 
tal presence of these realities one to another and which, 
moreover, is only one of the particular concretizations of this 
presence. For Pierre to be absent in relation to Therese is a 
particular way of his being present. In fact absence has mean- 
ing only if all the relations of Pierre with Therese are pre- 
served: he loves her, he is her husband, he supports her, etc. 
In particular, absence supposes the maintenance of the con- 
crete existence of Pierre: death is not an absence. Due to this 
fact the distance from Pierre to Therese in no way changes the 
fundamental fact of their reciprocal presence. In fact if we 
consider this presence from the point of view of Pierre, we 
see that it means either that Therese is existing in the midst 
of the world as the Other-as-object, or else that he feels that 
he exists for Therese as for the Other-as-subject. In the first 
case the distance is made contingent and signifies nothing in 
relation to the fundamental fact that Pierre is the one by 
whom “there is” a world as a Totality and that Pierre is pres- 
ent without distance to this world as the one through whom 
the distance exists. In the second case Pierre feels himself 



372 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

existing for Ther^se without distance: she is at a distance from 
him to the extent that she is removed and unfolds a distance 
between her and him; the entire world separates him from 
her. But for her he is without distance inasmuch as he is an 
object in the world which she makes come into being. Con- 
sequently in each case removal can not modify these essential 
relations. Whether the distance is small or great, between 
Pierre-as-object and Therese-as-subject, between Th6rese-as- 
object and Pierre-as-subject there is the infinite density of a 
world. Between Pierre-as-subject and Therese-as-object, and 
again between Therese-as-subject and Pierre-as-object there is 
no distance at all. Thus the empirical concepts of absence 
and of presence are two specifications of a fundamental pres- 
ence of Pierre to Th6rese and of Th6rese to Pierre. They are 
only different ways of expressing the presence and have 
meaning only through it. At London, in the East Indies, in 
America, on a desert island, Pierre is present to Therese who 
remains in Paris; he will cease to be present to her only at his 
death. 

TIus is because a being is not situated in relation to 
locations by means of degrees of longitude and latitude. He is 
situated in a human space — ^between “the Guermantes way” 
and “Swann’s way,” and it is the immediate presence of Swann 
and of the Duchesse de Guermantes which allows the unfold- 
ing of the “hodologicar’2^ space in which he is situated. Now 
this presence has a location in transcendence; it is the pres- 
ence-to-me in transcendence of my cousin in Morocco which 
affows me to unfold between him and me this road which 
situates-me-in-the-world and which can be called the road to 
Morocco. This road, indeed, is nothing but the distance 
between the Other-as-object which I could perceive in connec- 
tion with my being-for” and the Other-as-subject who is pres- 
ent to me without distance. Thus I am situated by the infinite 
^versity of the roads which lead me to the object of my world 
in correlation with the immediate presence of transcendent 
subjects. And as the world is given to me all at once with all 
Its beings, these roads represent only the ensemble of instru- 
mental complexes which allow me to cause an Other-as-object 

tuT'I’ ^ expression borrowed from Lewin and explained by Sartre in 
mo otu, pp. 57 ^ and 65. It refers to a map or spatial organization 

our environment in terms of our acts and needs. “The Guermantes 
. Swann's way" are references to Proust’s Remembrance of 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


373 


to appear as a “this” on the ground of the world, an Other- 
as-object who is already implicitly and really contained there. 

But these remarks can be generalized; it is not only Pierre, 
Rene, Lucien, who are absent or present in relation to me on 
the ground of original presence, for they are not alone in con- 
tributing to situate me; I am situated also as a European in 
relation to Asiatics, or to Negroes, as an old man in relation to 
the young, as a judge in relation to delinquents, as a bour- 
geois in relation to workers, etc. In short it is in relation to 
every living man that every human reality is present or absent 
on the ground of an original presence. This original presence 
can have meaning only as a being-looked-at or as a being- 
looking-at; ■ that is, according to whether the Other is an ob- 
ject for me or whether I'myself am an object-for-the-Other. 
Being-for-others is a constant fact of my human reality, and I 
grasp it with its factual necessity in every thought, however 
slight, which I form concerning myself. V^erever I go, what- 
ever I do, I only succeed in changing the distances between 
me and the Other-as-object, only avail myself of paths toward 
the Other. To withdraw, to approach, to discover this partic- 
ular Other-as-object is only to effect empirical variations on 
the fundamental theme of my being-for-others. The Other is 
present to me everywhere as the one through whom I become 
an object. Hence I can indeed be mistaken concerning the 
empirical presence of an Other-as-object whom I happen to 
encounter on my path. I can indeed believe that it is Annie 
who is coming toward me on the road and discover that it is 
an unknown person; the fundamental presence of Annie to me 
is not thereby changed. I can indeed believe that it is a man 
who is watching me in the half light and discover that it is a 
trunk of a tree which I took for a human being; my funda- 
mental presence to all men, the presence of all men to myself 
is not thereby altered. For the appearance of a man as an ob- 
ject in the field of my experience is not what informs me that 
there are men. My certainty of the Other’s existence is inde- 
pendent of these experiences and is, on the contrary, that 
which makes them possible. 

What appears to me then about which I can be mistaken 
IS mot the Other nor the real, concrete bond between tlie 
Other and Me; it is a this which can represent a man-as-object 
as well as not represent one. What is only probable is the dis- 
tance and the real proximity of the Other; that is, his character 
as an object and his belonging to the world which I cause to 



374 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

be revealed are not doubtful inasmuch as I make an Other 
appear by my very upsurge. However this objectivity dissolves 
in the world as the result of the Other’s being “an Other 
somewhere in the world.” The Other-as-object is certain as 
an appearance correlative with the recovery of my subjectivity, 
but it is never certain that the Other is that object. Similar- 
ly the fundamental fact, my being-as-object for a subject is 
accompanied by evidence of the same type as reflective evi- 
dence, but the case is not the same for the fact that at this pre- 
cise moment and for a particular Other, I am detached as 
on the ground of the world rather than remaining 
drowned in the indistinction of the ground. It is indubitable 
that at present I exist as an object for some German or other. 
But do I exist as a Frenchman, as a Parisian in the indifferen- 
tiation of these collectivities or in my capacity as this Parisian 
around whom the Parisian population and the French collec- 
tivity are suddenly organized to serve for him as ground? On 
this point I shall never obtain anything but bits of probable 
knowledge although they can be infinitely probable. 

We are able now to apprehend the nature of the look. In 
every look there is the appearance of an Other-as-object as a 
concrete and probable presence in my perceptive field; on the 
occasion of certain attitudes of that Other I determine my- 
self to apprehend — through shame, anguish, etc . — ^my be- 
ing-looked-at. This “being-1 ooked-at” is presented as the 
pure probability that I am at present this concrete this — a 
probability which can derive its meaning and its very nature 
as probable, only from a fundamental certainty that the 
Other is always present to me inasmuch as I am always jor- 
others. The proof of my condition as man, as an object for 
all other living men, as thrown in the arena beneath mil- 
lions of looks and escaping myself millions of times — ^this 
proof I realize concretely on the occasion of the upsurge of 
an object into my universe if this object indicates to me that 
I am probably an object at present functioning as a differ- 
entiated this for a consciousness. The proof is the ensemble 
of the phenomenon which we call the look. Each look makes 
us prove concretely—and in the indubitable certainty of the 
cogito ^that we exist for all living men; that is, that there 
are (some) consciousnesses for whom I exist. We put “some” 
between parentheses to indicate that the Other-as-subject 
present to me in this look is not given in the form of plu- 
raiitv anv more than as unity (save in its concrete relation to 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


375 


one particular Other-as-object) . Plurality, ia fact, belongs 
only to objects; it comes into being through the appearance 
of a world-making For-itself. Being-Iooked-at, by causing 
(some) subjects to arise for us, puts us in the presence of an 
unnumbered reality. 

By contrast, as soon as I look at those who are looking at 
me, the other consciousnesses are isolated in multiplicity. On 
the other hand if I turn away from the look as the occasion 
of concrete proof and seek to think emptily of the infinite 
indistinction of the human presence and to unify it under 
the concept of the infinite subject which is never an object, 
then I obtain a purely formal notion which refers to an in- 
finite series of mystic experiences of the presence of the 
Other, the notion of God as the omnipresent, infinite sub- 
ject for whom I exist. But these two objectivations, the con- 
crete, enumerating objectivation and the unifying, abstract 
objectivation, both lack proved reality — ^that is, the prenu- 
merical presence of the Other. 

These few remarks will become more concrete if we recall 
an experience familiar to everybody: if we happen to appear 
“in public” to act in a play or to give a lecture, we never 
lose sight of the fact that we are looked at, and we execute 
the ensemble of acts which we have come to perform in the 
presence of the look; better yet we attempt to constitute a 
being and an ensemble of objects for this look. While we 
are speaking, attentive only to the ideas which we wish to 
develop, the Other’s presence remains undifferentiated. It 
would be false to unify it under the headings class, audi- 
ence, etc. In fact we are not conscious of a concrete and in- 
dividualized being with a collective consciousness; these are 
images which will be able to serve after the event to trans- 
late our experience and which will more than half betray it. 
But neither do we apprehend a plural look. It is a matter 
rather of an intangible reality, fleeting and omnipresent, 
which realizes the unrevealed Me confronting us and which 
collaborates with us in the production of this Me which es- 
capes us. If on the other hand, I want to verify that my 
thought has been well understood and if in turn I look at 
the audience, then I shall suddenly see heads and eyes ap- 
pear. When objectivized the prenumerical reality of the Oth- 
er is decomposed and pluralized. But the look has disap- 
peared as well. It is for this prenumerical concrete reality 
that we ought to reserve the term “they” rather than for 



376 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

human reality’s state of unauthenticity. Wherever I am, they 
are perpetually looking at me. The they can never be appre- 
hended as an object, for it immediately disintegrates. 

Thus the look has set us on the track of our being-for- 
others and has revealed to us the indubitable existence of 
this Other for whom we are. But it can not lead us any fur- 
ther. What we must examine next is the fundamental rela- 
tion of the Me to the Other as he has been revealed to us. 
Or if you prefer, we must at present make explicit and fix 
thematically everything which is included within the limits 
of this original relation and ask what is the being of this 
being-for-others. 

There is one consideration which may be drawn from the 
preceding remarks and which will be of help to us. This is 
the fact that being-for-others is not an ontological structure 
of the For-itself. We can not think of deriving being-for- 
, others from a being-for-itself as one would derive a conse- 
quence from a principle, nor conversely can we think of de- 
riving being-for-itself from being-for-others. Of course our 
human-reality must of necessity be simultaneously for-itself 
and for-others, but our present investigation does not aim at 
constituting an anthropology. It would perhaps not be im- 
possible to conceive of a For-itself which would be wholly 
free from all For-others and which would exist \vithout even 
suspecting the possibility of being an object. But this For- 
itself simply would not be “man.” What the cogito reveals 
to us here is just factual necessity: it is found — and this is 
indisputable — ^that our being along with its being-for-itself 
is also for-others; the being which is revealed to the reflec- 
tive consciousness is for-itself-fdr-others. The Cartesian 
cogito only makes an affirmation of the absolute truth of a 
fact that of my existence. In the same way the cogito, a 
little expanded as we are using it here, reveals to us as a fact 
the eristence of the Other and my existence for the Other. 
That is all we can say. It is also true that my being-for-others 
as the upsurge of my consciousness into being has the char- 
acter of an absolute event. Since this event is at once an his- 
tqnzation — for I tempdralize myself as presence to others — 
condition, of all history, we shall call it a prehistoric 
histbrization. -It is as a prehistoric temporalization of simul- 
taneity that we shall consider it here. By prehistoric we do 
not mean that it is in a time prior to history — ^which would 
not make sense — but that it is a part of that orfginal tern- 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 377 

poralization which historicizes itself while making history 
possible. It is as fact — as a primary and perpetual fact — ^not 
as an essential necessity that we shall study being-for-others. 

We have seen previously the difference which separates the 
internal type of negation from the external negation. In par- 
ticular we have noted that the foundation of all knowledge 
of a determined being is the original relation by which in 
its very upsurge the For-itself has to be as not being this 
being. The negation which the For-itself thus realizes is an 
internal negation: the For-itself realizes it in its full freedom. 
Better yet, the for-itself is this negation in so far as it chooses 
itself as finitude. But the negation binds the For-itself in- 
dissolubly to the being which it is not, and we have been 
able to state that the For-itself includes in its being the being 
of the object which it is not, inasmuch as its being is in 
question as not being this being. 

These observations are applicable without any essential 
change to the primary relation of the For-itself with the 
Other. If in general there is an Other, it is necessary above 
all that T be the one who is not the Other, and it is in this 
very negation effected by me upon myself that I make my- 
self be and that the Other arises as the Other. This negation 
which constitutes my being and which, as Hegel said, makes 
me appear as the Same confronting the Other, constitutes 
me on the ground of a non-thetic selfness as “Myself.” We 
need not understand by this that a Self comes to dwell in 
our consciousness but that selfness is reinforced by arising 
as a negation of another selfness and that this reinforcement 
is positively apprehended as the continuous choice of self- 
ness by itself as the same selfness and as this very selfness. 
A for-itself which would have to be a self without being 
itself would be conceivable. The For-itself which I am sim- 
ply has to be what it is in the form of a refusal of the Oth- 
er; that is, as itself. Thus by utilizing the formulae applied 
to the knowledge of the Not-me in general, we can say that 
the For-itself as itself includes the being of the Other in its 
being in so far as its being is in question as not being the 
Other, In other words, m order for a consciousness to be 
able to not-be the Other and therefore in order that there 
may be an Other without making this non-being, which is 
the condition of the self of consciousness, become purely and 
simply the object of the establishment of a “third man” as 
witness, two things are necessary; consciousness must have 



378 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


to be itself and must spontaneously have to be this non- 
being; consciousness must freely disengage itself from t e 
Other and wrench itself away by choosing itself as ^ 
ingness which is simply Other than the Other and thereby 
must be reunited in “itself.” This very detachment, wh^ich 
is the being of the For-itself, causes there to be an Other. 
This does not mean that it gives being to the Other but sim- 
ply that it gives to the Other its being-other or the essentia 
condition of the “there is.” It is evident that for the For- 
itself the mode of being-what-is-not-the-Other is wholly para- 
lyzed by Nothingness; the For-itself is what is not the Othei 
in the nihilating mode of “reflection-reflecting.” The not-be 
ing-the-Other is never given but perpetually chosen in i 
perpetual resurrection: consciousness can not-be the Othe 
only in so far as it is consciousness (of) itself as not bein] 
the Other. Thus the internal negation, here as in the case o 
presence to the world, is a unitary bond of being. It is nec 
essary that the Other be present to consciousness in ever; 
part and even that it penetrate consciousness completely i 
order that consciousness precisely by being nothing may es 
cape that Other who threatens to ensnare it. If consciousnes 
were abruptly to be something, the distinction between il 
self and the Other would disappear at the heart of a toti 


undifferentiation. 

This description, however, allows an essential additio 
which will radically modify its implications. When consciou: 
ness realized itself as not being a particular this in the worlc 
the negative relation was not reciprocal. The this confronte 
did not make itself not-be consciousness; it was determine 
in and through consciousness not- to be consciousness; its r< 
lation to consciousness remained that of pure indifferent ej 
teriority. This is because the- “this” preserved its nature £ 
in-itself, and it was as in-itself that it was revealed t 
consciousness in the very negation by which the For-itse 
made itself be by denying that it was in-itself. But with n 
gard to the Other, - on the contrary, the internal negath 
relation is a relation,, of reciprocity. The being which coi 
^yfciousness has to not-be is defined as a being which has 1 
not-be this consciousness. This is because at the time of tl 
perception of the this in the world, consciousness differe 
frorn the this not only by its own individuality but also i 
its mode of being. It was For-itself confronting the In-itsel 
In the upsurge of the Other, however, consciousness is i 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHE^RS 379 

no way different from the Other so far as its mode of being 
is concerned. The Other is what consciousness is. The Other 
is For-itself and consciousness, and he refers to possibles 
which are bis possibles; he is himself by excluding the Oth- 
er. There can he (.o question of viewing this opposition to 
the Other in terms of a pure numerical determination. We 
do not have two or several consciousnesses here; numbering 
supposes an external witness and is tht pure and simple es- 
tablishment of exteriority. Tiere can be an Other for the 
For-itself only in a spontaneous and prenumerical negation. 
The Other exist.s for consciousness only as a refused self. 
But precisely because the Other is a self, he can himself be 
refused for and through me only in so far as it is his self 
which refuses me. I can neither apprehend nor conceive of 
a consciousness which does not apprehend me. The only 
consciousness which exists without apprehending me or re- 
fusing me and which I myself can conceive is not a con- 
sciousness isolated somewhere outside the world; it is my 
own. Thus the Other whom I recognize in order to refuse 
to be him is before all else the one for whom my For-itself 
is. Not only do I make myself not-be this other being by 
denying that he is me, I m^e myself not-be a being who is 
making himself not-be me. 

This double negation, however, is in a sense self-destruc- 
tive. One of two things happens: Either I make myself not- 
be a certain being, and then he is an object for me and I 
lose my object-ness for him; in this case the Other ceases to 
be the Other-Me — ^that is, the subject who makes me be an 
object by refusing to be me. Or else this being is indeed the 
Other and makes himself not-be me, in which case I become 
an object for him and he loses his own object-ness. Thus 
originally the Other is the Not-Me-not-object. Whatever may 
be the further steps in the dialectic of the Other, if the 
Other is to be at the start the Other, then on principle he 
can not be revealed in the same upsurge by which I deny 
being him. In this sense my fundamental negation can not 
be direct, for there is nothing on which it can be brought 
to bear. What I refuse to be can be nothing but this refusal 
to be the Me by means of which the Other is making me an 
object. Or, if you prefer, I refuse my refused Me; I deter- 
mine myself as Myself by means of die refusal of the Me- 
refused; I posit this refused Me as an alienated-Me in the 
same upsurge in which I wrench myself away from tlic Oth- 



380 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

er. But I thereby recognize and affirm not only the Other 
but the existence of my Self-for-others. Indeed this is be- 
cause I can not not-be the Other unless I assume my being- 
as-object for the Other. The disappearance of the alienated 
Me would involve the disappearance of the Other through 
the collapse of Myself. I escape the Other by leaving him 
with my alienated Me in his hands. But as I choose myself 
as a tearing away from the Other, I assume and recognize as 
mine this alienated Me. My wrenching away from the Other 
— ^that is, my Self — is by its essential structure an assump- 
tion as mine of this Me which the Other refuses; we can 
even say that it is only that. 

Thus this Me which has been alienated and refused is 
simultaneously my bond with the Other and the symbol of 
our absolute separation. In fact to the extent that I am The 
One who makes there be an Other by means of the aSirma- 
tion of my selfness, the Me-as-object is mine and I claim it; 
for the separation of the Other and of myself is never giv- 
en; I am perpetually responsible for it in my being. But in 
so far as the Other is co-responsible for our original separa- 
tion, this Me escapes me since it is what the Other makes 
himself not-be. Thus I claim as mine and for me a Me 
which escapes me. And since I make myself not-be the Oth- 
er, in so far as the Other is a spontaneity identical with 
mine, it is precisely as Me-escaping-myself that I claim this 
Me-as-object. This Me-as-object is the Me which I am to 
the exact extent that it escapes me; in fact I should refuse it 
as mine if it could coincide with myself in a pure selfness. 

Thus my being-for-others — i.e., my Me-as-object — is not 
an image cut off from me and growing in a strange con- 
sciousness. It is a perfectly real being, my being as the 
condition of my selfness confronting the Other and of the 
Other’s selfness confronting me. It is my being-outside 

not a being passively submitted to which would itself have 
corne to me from outside, but an outside assumed and rec- 
ognized as my outside. In fact it is possible for me to deny 
that the Other is me only in so far as the Other is himself a 
subject. If I immediately refused the Other as pure object' — ■ 
that is, as existing in the midst of the world — it would not 
be the Other which I refused but rather an object which on 
principle had nothing in common with subjectivity. I should 
remain defenseless before a total assimilation of myself to 
t e Other for failing to take precautions within the true 



381 


THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 

province of the Other — subjectivity— which is also my prov- 
ince. But this limit can neither come from me nor be thought 
by me, for I can not limit myself; otherwise I should be a 
finite totality. On the other hand, in Spinoza’s terms, thought 
can be limited only by thought. Consciousness can be limit- 
ed only by my consciousness. Now we can grasp the nature 
of my Self as-object: it is the limit between two conscious- 
nesses as it is produced by the limiting consciousness and 
assumed by the limited consciousness. And we must under- 
stand it in the two senses of the word “limit.” On the side 
of the limiting, indeed, the limit is apprehended as the con- 
tainer which contains me and surrounds me, the shell of 
emptiness which pleads for me as a totality while putting 
me out of play; on the side of the limited, it is wholly a 
phenomenon of selfness and is as the mathematical limit is 
to the series which progresses toward it without ever reach- 
ing it. Every being which I have to be is at its limit like an 
asymptotic curve to a straight line. Thus I am a detotalized 
and indefinite totality, contained within a finite totality 
which surrounds me at a distance and which I am outside 
myself without ever being able either to realize it or even to 
touch it; 

A good comparison for my efforts to apprehend myself 
and their futility might be found in that sphere described by 
Poincare in which the temperature decreases as one goes from 
its center to its surface. Living beings attempt to arrive at the 
surface of this sphere by setting out from its center, but the 
lowering of temperature produces in them a continually in- 
creasing contraction. They tend to become infinitely flat pro- 
portionately to their approaching their goal, and because of 
this fact they are separated from the surface by an inflnite dis- 
tance. Yet this limit beyond reach, the Self-as-object, is not 
ideal; it is a real being. This being is not in-itself, for it is 
not produced in the pure exteriority of indifference. But 
neither is it for-itself, for it is not the being which I have to 
be by nihilating myself. It is precisely my being-for-others, 
this being which is divided between two negations with 
opposed origins and opposite meanings. For the Other is not 
this Me of which he has an intuition and 7 do not have the 
intuition of this Me which I am. Yet this Me, produced l3y 
the one and assumed by the other, derives its absolute reality 
from the fact that it is the only separation possible between 
two beings fundamentally identical as regards their mode of 



382 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


being and immediately present one to the other; for since con- 
sciousness alone can limit consciousness, no other mean is 
conceivable between them. 

In view of this presence of the Other-as-subject to me in 
and through my assumed object-ness, we can see that my 
making an object out of the Other must be the second mo- 
ment in my relation to him. In fact the Other’s presence be- 
yond my unrevealed limit can serve as motivation for my re- 
apprehension of myself as a free selfness. To the extent that I 
deny that I am the Other and as the Other is first manifested, 
he can be manifested only as the Other; that is, as a subject 
beyond my limit, as the one who limits me. In fact nothing 
can limit me except the Other. Therefore he appears as the 
one who in his full freedom and in his free projection to- 
ward his possibles puts me out of play and strips me of my 
transcendences by refusing to '‘join in” (in the sense of the 
German mitmachen). Thus at first I must grasp only that 
one of the two negations for which I am not responsible, the 
one which does not come to me through myself. But in the 
very apprehension of this negation there arises the conscious- 
ness (of) myself as myself; that is, I can obtain an explicit 
self-consciousness inasmuch as I am also responsible for a ne- 
gation of the Other which is my own possibility. This is the 
process of making explicit the second negation, Ae one which 
proceeds from me to the Other. In truth it was already there 
but hidden by the other negation since it was lost in order to 
make the other appear. But the other negation is the reason 
for the appearance of the new one; for if there is an Other 
who puts me out of play by positing my transcendence as 
purely contemplated, this is because I wrench myself away 
from the Other by assuming my limit. The consciousness 
(of) this wrenching away of the consciousness of (being) 
the same in relation to the Other is the consciousness (of) 
my free spontaneity. By this very wrenching away which puts 
the Other in possession of my limit, I am already putting the 
Other out of play. Therefore in so far as I am conscious (of) 
myself as of one of my free possibilities and in so far as I 
project myself toward myself in order to realize this selfness, 
to that extent I am responsible for the existence of the Other. 
It is I who by the very affirmation of my free spontaneity cause 
there to be an Other and not simply an infinite reference of 
consciousness to itself. Tlie Other then finds himself put out 
of play; he is now what it depends on me to not-be, and 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 383 

thereby his transcendence is no longer a transcendence which 
transcends me toward himself but a purely contemplated 
transcendence, simply a given circuit of selfness. Since I 
can not realize both negations at once, the new negation, 
although it has the other negation for its motivation, in turn 
disguises it. The Other appears to me as a degraded presence. 
This is because the Other and I are in fact co-responsible for 
the Other’s existence, but it is by two negations such that I 
can not experience the one without immediately disguising the 
second. Thus the Other becomes now what I limit in my very 
projection toward not-being-the-Other. 

Naturally it is necessary to realize here that the motiva- 
tion of this passage is of the affective order. For example, 
nothing would prevent me from remaining fascinated by this 
Unrevealed with its beyond if I did not realize this Unrevealed 
specifically in fear, in shame, or in pride. It is precisely the 
affective character of these motivations which accounts for the 
empirical contingency of these changes in point of view. But 
these feelings themselves are nothing more than our way of 
affectively experiencing our being-for-others. Fear in fact im- 
plies that I appear to myself as threatened by virtue of my 
being a presence in the world, not in my capacity as a For-it- 
self which causes a world to exist. It is the object which / am 
which is in danger in the world and which as such, because 
of its indissoluble unity of being with the being which I have 
to be, can involve in its own ruin the ruin of the For-itself 
which I have to be. Fear is therefore the discovery of my 
being-as-object on the occasion of the appearance of another 
object in my perceptive field. It refers to the origin of all fear, 
which is the fearful discovery of my pure and simple object- 
state in so far as it is surpassed and transcended by possibles 
which are not my possibles. It is by thrusting myself toward 
my possibles that I shall escape fear to the extent that I shall 
consider my object-ness as non-essential. This can happen 
only if I apprehend myself as being responsible for the 
Other’s being. The Other becomes then that which 1 make 
myself not-be, and his possibilities are possibilities which I 
refuse and which I can simply contemplate whence dead- 
possibilities. Therefore I surpass my present possibilities 
in so far as I consider them as always able to be surpassed 
by the Other’s possibilities, but I also surpass the Other’s 
possibilities by considering them from the point of view 
of the only quality which he has which is not his own 



384 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

possibility — ^his very character as Other inasmuch as I cause 
there to be an Other. I surpass the Other’s possibilities by 
considering them as possibilities of surpassing me which I 
can always surpass toward new possibilities. Thus by one and 
the same stroke I have regained my being-for-itself through 
my consciousness (of) myself as a perpetual center of infinite 
possibilities, and I have transformed the Other’s possibilities 
into dead-possibilities by affecting them all with the character 
of “not-lived-by-me " — that is, as simply given. 

Similarly shame is only the original feeling of having my 
being outside, engaged in another being and as such without 
any defense, illuminated by the absolute light which emanates 
from a pure subject. Shame is the consciousness of being 
irremediably what I always was: “in' suspense” — ^that is, in 
the mode of the “not-yet” or of the “already-^no-longer.” Pure 
shame is not a feeling of being this or that guilty object but 
in general of being an object; that is, of recognizing myself 
in this degraded, fixed, and dependent being which I am for 
the Other. Shame is the feeling of an original fall, not be- 
cause of the fact that I may have committed this or that 
particular fault but simply that I have “fallen” into the world 
in the midst of things and that I need the mediation of the 
Other in order to be what I am. 

Modesty and in particular the fear of being surprised in 
a state of nakedness are only a symbolic specification of 
original shame; the body symbolizes here our defenseless state 
as objects. To put on clothes is to hide one’s object-state; it 
is to claim the right of seeing without being seen; that is, to 
be pure subject. This is why the Biblical symbol of the fall 
after the original sin is the fact that Adam and Eve “know 
that they are naked.” The reaction to shame will consist exact- 
ly in apprehending as an object the one who apprehended tny 
own object-state. 

In fact from the moment that the Other appears to me as 
an object, his subjectivity becomes a simple property of the 
object considered. It is’ degraded and is defined as “an ensem- 
ble of objective properties which on principle elude me.” The 
Other-as-Object “has” a subjectivity as this hollow box has 

an inside.” In this way I recover myself, for I can not be 
an object for an object. I certainly do not deny that the Other 
remains connected with me “inside him,” but the conscious- 
ness which he has of me, since it is consciousness-as-an- 
object, appears to me as pure interiority without efficacy. It is 


THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 385 

just one property among others of that “inside,” something 
comparable to a sensitized plate in the closed compartment of 
a camera. In so far as I make there be an Other, I apprehend 
myself as the free source of the knowledge which the Other 
has of me, and the Other appears to me as affected in his 
being by that knowledge which he has of my being inasmuch 
as I have affected him with the character of Other. This knowl- 
edge takes on then a subjective character in the new sense of 
“relative”; that is, it remains in the subject-as-object as a 
quality relative to the being-other with which I have affected 
him. It no longer touches me; it is an image of me in him. 
Thus subjectivity is degraded into interiority, free conscious- 
ness into a pure absence of principles, possibilities into prop- 
erties and the knowledge by which the Other touches me 
in my being into a pure image of me in the Other’s “con- 
sciousness.” Shame motivates the reaction which surpasses and 
overcomes the shame inasmuch as the reaction encloses within 
it an implicit and non-thematized comprehension of being- 
able-to-be-an-object on the part of the subject for whom I 
am an object. This implicit comprehension is nothing other 
than the consciousness (of) my “being-myself”; that is, of my 
selfness reinforced. In fact in the structure which expresses 
the experience “I am ashamed of myself,” shame supposes a 
me-as-object for the Other but also a selfness which is 
ashamed and which is imperfectly expressed by the “I” of 
the formula. Thus shame is a unitary apprehension with three 
dimensions: ‘7 am ashamed of myself before the Other.'' 

If any one of these dimensions disappears, the shame dis- 
appears as well. If, however, I conceive of the “they” as a 
subject before whom I am ashamed, then it can not become 
an object without being scattered into a plurality of Others; 
and if I posit it as the absolute unity of the subject which 
can in no way become an object, I thereby posit the eternity 
of my being-as-object and so perpetuate my shame. This is 
shame before God; that is, the recognition of my being-an- 
object before a subject which can never become an object. By 
the same stroke I realize my object-state in the absolute and 
hypostasize it. The position of God is accompanied by a reifi- 
cation of my object-ness. Or better yet, I posit my being-an- 
object-for-God as more real than my For-itself; I exist alien- 
ated and I cause myself to learn from outside what I must be. 
This is the origin of fear before God. Black masses, desecra- 
tion of the host, demonic associations, etc., are so many at- 



386 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

tempts to confer the character of object on the absolute Sub- 
ject. In desiring Evil for Evil’s sake I attempt to contemplate 
the divine transcendence — ^for which Good is the peculiar 
possibility — as a purely given transcendence and one which I 
transcend toward Evil. Then I “make God suffer,” I “irritate 
him,” etc. These attempts, which imply the absolute recogni- 
tion of God as a subject who can not be an object, carry their 
own contradiction within them and are always failures. 

Pride does not exclude original shame. In fact it is on the 
ground of fundamental shame or shame of being an object 
that pride is built. It is an ambiguous feeling. In pride I rec- 
ognize the Other as the subject through whom my being gets 
its object-state, but I recognize as well that I myself am also 
responsible for my object-ness. I emphasize my responsibility 
and I assume it. In one sense therefore pride is at first res- 
ignation; in order to be proud of being that, I must of 
necessity first resign myself to being only that. We are there- 
fore dealing with a primary reaction to shame, and it is already 
a reaction of flight and of bad faith; for without ceasing to 
hold the Other as a subject, I try to apprehend myself as 
affecting the Other by my object-state. In short there are two 
authentic attitudes: that by which I recognize the Other as 
the subject through whom I get my object-ness — ^this is shame; 
and that by which I apprehend myself as the free object by 
which the Other gets his being-other — this is arrogance or the 
aflSrmation of my freedom confronting the Other-as-object. 
But pride— or vanity — is a feeling without equilibrium, and it 
is in bad faith. In vanity I attempt in my capacity as Object to 
act upon the Other. I take this beauty or this strength or 
this intelligence which he confers on me — in so far as he con- 
stitutes me as an object — and I attempt to make use of it in a 
return shock so as to affect him passively with a feeling of 
admiration or of love. But at the same time I demand that this 
feeling as the sanction of my being-as-object should be enter- 
tained by the Other in his capacity as subject — i.e., as a free- 
dom. This is, in fact, the only way of conferring an absolute 
object-ness on my strength or on my beauty. Thus the feeling 
which I demand from the other carries within itself its own 
contradiction since I must affect the Other with it in so far 
as^ he is free. The feeling is entertained in the mode of bad 
faith, and its internal development leads it to disintegration. 
In fact as I play my assumed role of my being-as-object, I 
attempt to recover it as an object. Since the Other is the key 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 387 

to it, I attempt to lay hold of the Other so that he may release 
to me the secret of my being. Thus vanity impels me to get 
hold of the Other and to constitute him as an object in order 
to burrow into the heart of this object to discover there my 
own object-state. But this is to kill the hen that lays the 
golden eggs. By constituting the Other as object, I con- 
stitute myself as an image at the heart of the Other-as-object, 
hence the disillusion of vanity. In that image which I 
wanted to grasp in order to recover, it and merge it with my 
own being, I no longer recognize myself. I must willy-nilly 
impute the image to the Other as one of his own subjective 
properties. Freed in spite of myself from my object-state, I 
remain alone confronting the Other-as-object in my unquali- 
fiable self ness which I have to be forever without relief. 

Shame, fear, and pride are my original reactions; they are 
only various ways by which I recognize the Other as a subject 
beyond reach, and they include within them a comprehension 
of my selfness which can and must serve as my motivation 
for constituting the Other as an object. 

This Other-as-object who suddenly appears to me does not 
remain a purely objective abstraction. He rises before me with 
his particular meanings. He is not only the object which 
possesses freedom as a property, as a transcended transcen- 
dence. He is also' “angry” or “joyful” or “attentive”; he is 
“amiable” or “disagreeable”; he is “greedy,” “quick-tem- 
pered,” etc. This is because while apprehending myself as 
myself, I make the Other-as-object exist in the midst of the 
world. I recognize his transcendence, but I recognize it not as 
a transcendence transcending, but as a transcendence tran- 
scended. It appears therefore as a surpassing of instruments 
toward ends to the exact extent that in my unitary projection 
of myself I surpass these ends, these instruments, and the 
Other’s surpassing of the instruments, toward ends. This is 
because I never apprehend myself abstractly as the pure 
possibility of being myself, but I live my selfness in its con- 
crete projection toward this or that particular end. I exist only 
as engaged^^ and I am conscious (of) being only as engaged. 
Thus I apprehend the Other-as-object only in a concrete and 
^ Tr. Somewhat unhappily I have decided to use the English words 
“engage” and “engagement” for Sartre’s engager and engagement simply 
because there is no one English word which conveys all the meaning of 
the French. In French engager includes the ideas of “commitment,” of 
“involvement," of “immersion,” and even of “entering,” as well as the 
English sense of “engagement,” 



388 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


engaged surpassing of his transcendence. But conversely the 
Other’s engagement, which is his mode of being, appears to 
me, in so far as it is transcended by my transcendence, as a 
real engagement, as a taking root. In short, so far as I exist 
for-myself, my “engagement” in a situation must be under- 
stood in the sense in which we say: “I am engaged to a partic- 
ular person, I am engaged to return that money,” etc. It is 
this engagement which characterizes the Other-as-subject since 
he is another self like me. But when I grasp the Other as an 
object, his objectivized engagement is degraded and becomes 
an engagement-as-object in the sense in which we say, “The 
knife is deeply engaged in the wound.” Or, “The army was 
engaged in a narrow pass.” It must be understood that the 
being-in-the-midst-of-the-world which comes to the Other 
through me is a real being. It is not at all a purely subjective 
necessity which makes me know him as existing in the midst 
of the world. Yet on the other hand the Other did not 
by himself lose himself in the world. I make him lose him- 
self in the world which is mine by the sole fact that he is 
for rne the one who I have to not-be; that is, by the sole 
fact that I hold him outside myself as a purely contemplated 
reality surpassed^ toward my own ends. Thus objectivity is not 
t e pure refraction of the Other across my consciousness; it • 
comes through me to the Other as a real qualification: I make 
the Other be in the midst of the world. 

^erefore what^ I apprehend as real characteristics of the 
L ^®^8'in"Situation. In fact I organize him in the 
T ^ ''^orld in so far as he organizes the world toward 
» apprehend him as the objective unity of instruments 
that ^ In Part Two of this work we explained 

instruments is the exact correlate of my 
poss bilities .^2 Since I am my possibilities, the order of instru- 

intn ^ IS the image of my possibilities projected 

in-itself; that is, the image of what I am. But this 
mundane image I can never decipher; I adapt myself to it in 
is action. The Other inasmuch as he is a subject 

inVn ^ in his image. On the other hand, 

which lean! + ^^^^P i^^ni as object, it is this mundane image 
which is ^ Other ^becomes the instrument 
is an cirdPT f ^ ^ relation with all other instruments; he 

which T - ^ instruments which is included in the order 

I impose on these instruments. To apprehend the 

Part Two. Chapter Three. Section III. 


389 


THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 

Other is to apprehend this enclave-order and to refer it back 

^ it is to define this absence 

as a fixed flow of the objects of my world toward a definite 
object of my universe. And the meaning of this flow is fur- 
msh^ to me by those objects themselves. The arrangement of 
the harder and nails, of the chisel and marble, the arrange- 
ment which I suqjass without being its foundation defines the 
meaning of this internal hemorrhage in the world. 

Thus the world announces the Other to me in his totality 
and as a totality. To be sure, the announcement remains am- 
biguous. But this is because I grasp the order of the world to- 
ward the Other as an undifferentiated totality on the ground 
of which certain explicit structures appear. If I could make 
explicit all the instrumental complexes as they are turned to- 
ward the Other (that is, if I could grasp not only the place 
which the hammer and the nails occupy in this complex of 
instrumentality but also the street, the city, the nation, etc.), I 
should have defined explicitly and totally the being of the 
Other as object. If I am mistaken concerning an intention of 
the Other, this is not because I refer his gesture to a sub- 
jectivity beyond reach; this subjectivity in itself and by itself 
has no common measure with the gesture, for it is transcen- 
dence^ for itself, an unsurpassable transcendence. But I 
am mistaken because I organize the entire world around this 
gesture differently than it is organized in fact. Thus by the 
sole fact that the Other appears as object, he is given to me 
on principle as a totality; he is extended across the whole 
world as a mundane power for the synthetic organization of 
this world. I can not make this synthetic organization explicit 
any more than I can make the world itself explicit in so far 
as it is my world. The difference between the Other-as-subject 
— i.e., between the Other such as he is for-hunself — and the 
Other-as-object is not a difference between the whole and the 
part or between the hidden and the revealed. The Other-as- 
object is on principle a whole co-extensive with subjective 
totality; nothing is hidden and in so far as objects refer to 
other objects, I can increase mdefinitely ray knowledge of the 
Other by indefinitely making explicit his relations with other 
instruments in the world. The ideal of knowledge of the 
Other remains the exhaustive specification of the meaning of 
the flow of the world. The difference of principle between 
the Other-as-object and the Other-as-subject stems solely from 
this fact: that the Other-as-subject can in no way be knowi 



390 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


nor even conceived as such. There is no problem of the knowl- 
edge of the Other-as-subject, and the objects of the world do 
not refer to his subjectivity; they refer only to his object-state 
in the world as the meaning — surpassed toward my selfness 
— of the intra-mundane flow. 

Thus the Other’s presence to me as the one who produces 
my object-state is experienced as a subject-totality. If I turn 
toward this presence in order to grasp it, I apprehend the 
Other once more as totality: an object-totality co-extensive 
with the totality of the world. This apprehension is made 
all of a sudden; it is from the standpoint of the entire world 
that I arrive at the Other-as-object. But it is never anything 
but particular relations which come out in relief like figures 
on the ground of the world. Around this man whom I do not 
know and who is reading in the subway, the entire world is 
present. It is not his body only — as an object in the world — 
which defines him in his being; it is his identity card, it is the 
direction of the particular train which he has boarded, it is 
the ring which he wears on his finger. Not as the result of 
the signs of what he is — ^this notion of a sign, in fact, would 
refer us to a subjectivity which I can not even conceive and 
in which he is precisely nothing, strictly speaking, since he 
is what he is not and is not what he is — ^but by virtue of real 
characteristics of his being. Yet if I know that he is in the 
midst of the world, in France, in Paris, in the process of read- 
ing; still for lack of seeing his identity card, I can only sup- 
pose that he is a foreigner (which means: to suppose that he 
is subject to special regulations, that he figures on some official 
register, that I must speak to him in Dutch, or in Italian in 
order to obtain from him this or that particular gesture, that 
the international post directs toward him by this or that route 
letters bearing this or that stamp, etc.). Yet this identity card 
is on principle given to me in the midst of the world. It does 
not escape' me — from the moment that it was created, it has 
been set to existing for me. It exists in an implicit state like 
each point of the circle which I see as a completed form. And 
It would be necessary to change the present totality of my 
relations to the world in order to make the identity card 
appear as an explicit this on the ground of the universe. In the 
same way the anger of the Other-as-object as it is manifested 
o me^ across his cries, his stamping, and his threatening ges- 
tures IS not the sign of a subjective and hidden anger; it refers 
to nothing except to other gestures and to other cries. It 


391 


THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 

defines the Other, it is the Other. To be sure, I can be mis- 
taken and can take for true anger what is only a pretended 
irritation. But it is only in relation to other gestures and to 
other objectively apprehensible acts that I can be mistaken. 
I am mistaken if I apprehend the motion of his hand as a 
real intention to hit me. That is, I am mistaken if I interpret 
it as the function of an objectively discernible gesture which 
will not take place. In a word the anger objectively appre- 
hended is a disposition of the world around an intra- 
mundane presence-absence. 

Does this mean that we must grant that the Behaviorists 
are right? Certainly not. For although the Behaviorists inter- 
pret man in terms of his situations, they have lost sight of 
his characteristic principle, which is transcendence-tran- 
scended. In fact if the Other is the object which can not be 
limited to himself, he is also the object which is understood 
only in terms of his end. Of course the hammer and the saw 
are not understood any differently. Both are apprehended 
through their function; that is, through their end. But this is 
exactly because they are already human. I can understand 
them ohly in so far as they refer me to an instrumental-organi- 
zation in which the Other is the center, only in so far as they 
form a part of a complex wholly transcended toward an end 
which I in turn transcend. If then we can compare the Other 
to a machine, this is because the machine as a human fact 
presents already the trace of a transcendence-transcended, just 
as the looms in a mill are explained only by the fabrics which 
they produce. The Behaviorist point of view must be reversed, 
and this reversal, moreover, will leave the Other’s objectivity 
intact. For that which first of all is objective — ^what we shall 
call signification after the fashion of French and English psy- 
chologists, intention according to the Phenomenologists, tran- 
scendence with Heidegger, or form with the Gestalt school — 
this is the fact that the Other can be defined only by a total 
organization of the world and that he is the key to this orgard- 
zation. If therefore I return from the world to the Other in 
order to define him, this is not because the world would make 
me understand the Other but because the Other-as-object is 
nothing but a center of autonomous and intra-mundane refer- 
ence in my world. 

Thus the objective fear which we can apprehend when 
we perceive the Other-as-object is not the ensemble of the 
physiological manifestations of disorder which we see or 


392 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

which we measure with sphygmograph or a stethoscope. Fear 
i^ a flight; it is a fainting. These phenomena themselves are 
not released to us as a pure series of movements but as tran- 
scendence-transcended: the flight or the fainting is not only 
that desperate running through the brush, nor that heavy 
fall on the stones of the road; it is the total upheaval of the 
instrumental-organization which had the Other for its cen- 
ter. This soldier who is fleeing foririerly had the Other-as- 
enemy at the point of his gun. The distance from him to the 
enemy was measured by the trajectory of his bullet, and I 
too could apprehend and transcend that distance as a dis- 
tance organized round the “soldier” as center. But behold 
now he throws his gun in the ditch and is trying to save 
himself. Immediately the presence of the enemy surrounds 
him and presses in upon him; the enemy, who had been 
held at a distance by the trajectory of the bullets, leaps upon 
him at the very instant when the trajectory collapses; at the 
same time that land in the background, which he was defend- 
ing and against which he was leaning as against a wall, sud- 
denly opens fan-wise and becomes the foreground, the wel- 
coming horizon toward which he is fleeing for refuge. All 
this I establish objectively, and it is precisely this which I 
apprehend as fear. Fear is nothing but a magical conduct 
tending by incantation to suppress the frightening objects 
which we are unable to keep at a distance.^® It is precisely 
through its results that we apprehend fear, for it is given to 
us as a new type of internal hemorrhage in the world — ^the 
passage from the world to a type of magical existence. 

We must be careful however to remember that the Other 
is a qualified object for me only to the extent that I can 
be one for him. Therefore he will be objectivized as a non- 
individualized portion of the “they” or as purely “absent” 
represented by his letters and his written accounts of him- 
self or as this man present in fact, according to whether 
I shall have been myself an element for him of the “they” or 
a “dear absent one” or a concrete “this man.” What decides 
in each case the type of objectivation of the Other and of his 
qualities is both my situation in the world and his situation; 
that is, the instrumental complexes which we have each or- 
ganized and the various thises which appear to each one of 
us on the ground of the world. All this naturally brings us 
to facticity. It is my facticity and the Other’s facticity which 

“ C/. Esquisse d’une theorie des Emotions. 1939. 



393 


THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 

decide whether .the Other can see me and whether I can see 
this particular Other. But the problem of facticity is beyond 
the scope of this general exposition. We shall consider it in 
the course of the next chapter. 

Thus I make proof of the Other’s presence as a quasi-total- 
ity of subjects in my being-an-object-for-Others, and on the 
ground of this totality I can experience more particularly the 
presence of a concrete subject without ^however being able 
to specify it as that particular Other. My defensive reaction 
to my object-state will cause the Other to appear before me 
in the capacity of this or that object. As such he will appear 
to me as a “this-one”; that is, his subjective quasi-totality is 
degraded and becomes a total ity-as-object co-extensive with 
the totality of the World. This totality is revealed to me 
without reference to the Other’s subjectivity. The relation of 
the Other-as-subject to the Other-as-object is in no way 
comparable to that which we usually establish, for example, 
between the physical object and the object of perception. 
The Other-as-object is revealed to me for what he is, he re- 
fers only to himself. The Other-as-object is simply such 
as he appears to me on the plane of object-ness in general and 
in his being-as-object; it is not even conceivable that I should 
refer back any knowledge which I have of him to his sub- 
jectivity such as I experience it on the occasion of the look. 
The Other-as-object is only an object, but my apprehension 
of him includes the comprehension of the fact that I could 
always and on principle produce from him another ex- 
perience by placing myself on another plane of being. This 
comprehension is constituted on the one hand by the em- 
pirical knowledge of my past experience — ^which is moreover 
as we have seen, the pure past (out of reach and what I have 
to be) of this experience, and on the other hand it is con- 
stituted by an implicit apprehension of the dialectic of the 
Other. The Other is at present what I make myself not-be. 
But although for the instant I am rid of him and escape him, 
there remains around him the permanent possibility that he 
may make himself other. Nevertheless this possibility, fore- 
seen in the embarrassment and constraint which forms the 
specific quality of my attitude confronting the Other-as-object, 
is strictly speaking inconceivable: first because I can not con- 
ceive of a possibility which is not my possibility nor can^ I 
apprehend transcendence except by transcending it — that is, 
by grasping it as a transcendence-transcended; secondly be- 



394 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

cause this anticipated possibility is not the possibility of the 
Other-as-object— the possibilities of the Other-as-object are 
dead-possibilities which refer to other objective aspects of 
the Other. The peculiar possibility of apprehending myself 
as an object is the possibility belonging to the Other-as-subject 
and hence is not for me a living possibility; it is an ab- 
solute possibility — ^which derives its source only from itself 
— that on the ground of the total annihilation of the 
Other-as-object, there may occur the upsurge of an Other-as- 
subject which I shall experience across my objectivity-for-him. 

Thus the Other-as-object is an explosive instrument which 
I handle with care because I foresee around him the perma- 
nent possibility that they are going to make it explode and 
that with this explosion I shall suddenly experience the 
flight of the world away from me and the alienation of my 
being. Therefore my constant concern is to contain the Other 
within his objectivity, and my relations with the Other-as- 
object are essentially made up of ruses designed to make him 
remain an object. But one look on the part of the Other is 
sufficient to make all these schemes collapse and to make me 
experience once more the transfiguration of the Other. Thus 
I am referred from transfiguration to degradation and from 
degradation to transfiguration without ever being able 
either to get a total view of the ensemble of these two modes 
of being on the part of the Other — ^for each of them is self- 
sufficient and refers only to itself — or to hold firmly to either 
one of them — ^for each has its own instability and collapses 
in order for the other to rise from its ruins. Only the dead 
can be perpetually objects without ever becoming subjects — 
for to die is not to lose one’s objectivity in the midst of the 
world; all the dead are there in the world around us. But to 
die is to lose all possibility of revealing oneself as subject 
to an Other. 

At this point in our investigation now we have elucidated 
the essential structures of being-for-others, there is an obvious 
temptation to raise the metaphysical question: “Why are 
there Others?” As we have seen, the existence of Others is 
not a consequence which can derive from the ontological 
structure of the for-itself. It is a primary event, to be sure, 
but of a metaphysical order; that is, it results from the con- 
tingency of being. The question “why” is essentially con- 
nected with these metaphysical existences. 

We know vety well that the answer to the “why” can only 



395 


THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 

refer us to an original contingency, but still it is necessary 
to prove that the metaphysical phenomenon which we are 
considering is an irreducible contingency. In this sense ontol- 
ogy appears to us capable of being defined as the specifica- 
tion of the structures of being of the existent taken as a to- 
tality, and- we shall define metaphysics rather as raising the 
question of the existence of the existent. This is why in 
view of the absolute contingency of the existent, we are con- 
vinced that any metaphysics must conclude with a “that is” — 
i.e., in a direct intuition 'of that contingency. 

Is it possible to posit the question of the existence of 
Others? Is this existence an irreducible fact, or is it to be 
derived from a fundamental contingency? Such are the pre- 
liminary questions which we can in turn pose to the metaphy- 
sician who questions us concerning the existence of Others. 

Let us examine more closely the possibility of the meta- 
physical question. What appears to us first is the fact that the 
being-for-others represents the third ekstasis of the for-itself. 
The first ekstasis is indeed the tridimensional projection on 
the part of the for-itself toward a being which it has to be 
in the mode of non-being. It represents the first fissure, the 
nihilation which the for-itself has to be, the wrenching away 
on the part of the for-itself from everything which it is, and 
this wrenching away is constitutive of its being. The second 
ekstasis or reflective ekstasis is the wrenching away from 
this very wrenching away. The reflective scissiparity corre- 
sponds to a vain attempt to take a point of view on the 
nihilation which the for-itself has to be, in order that this 
nihilation as a simply given phenomenon may be a nihi- 
lation which is. But at the same time reflection wants to re- 
cover this wrenching away, which it attempts to contem- 
plate as a pure given, by affirming concerning itself that 
it is this nihilation which is. This is a flagrant contradiction: 
in order to be able to apprehend my transcendence, I should 
have to transcend it. But my own transcendence can only 
transcend. I am my own transcendence; I can not make 
use of it so as to constitute it as a transcendence-transcended. 

I am condemned to be forever my own nihilation. In short 
reflection (reflexion) is the reflected-on. 

The reflective nihilation, however, is pushed further than 
that of the pure for-itself as a simple self-consciousness. In 
self-consciousness, in fact, the two terms of the dyad “reflect- 
ed-reflecting” (reflet e-re fletant) were so incapable of present- 



396 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ing themselves separately that the duality remained perpetually 
evanescent and each term while positing itself for the other 
became the other. But with reflection, the case is different 
since the “reflection-reflecting” which is reflected-on exists 
for a “reflection-reflecting” which is reflective. Reflected-on 
and reflective, therefore, each tend toward independence, and 
the nothing which separates them tends to divide &ein 
more profoundly than the nothingness which the For-itself 
has to be separates the reflection from the reflecting. Yet 
neither the reflective nor the reflected-on can secrete this 
separating nothingness, for in that case reflection (reflexion) 
would be an autonomous for-itself coming to direct itself on 
the reflected-on which would be to suppose an external ne- 
gation as the preliminary condition of an internal negation. 
There can be no reflection if it is not entirely a being, a 
being which has to be its own nothingness. 

Thus the reflective ekstasis is found on the path to a more 
radical ekstasis — ^the being-for-others. The final term of the 
nihilation, the ideal pole should be in fact the external ne- 
gation — ^that is, a scissiparity in-itself or the spatial exterior- 
ity of indifference. In relation to this external negation the 
three ekstases are ranked in the order which we have just 
presented, but the goal is never achieved. It remains on 
principle ideal; in fact the for-itself — without running the 
risk of ceasing by the same stroke to be-for-itself — can not by 
itself realize in relation to any being a negation which would 
be in-itself. The constitutive negation of being-for-others is 
therefore an internal negation; it is a nihilation which the 
for-itself has to be, just like the reflective nihilation. But here 
the scissiparity attacks the very negation; it is no longer only 
the negation which divides being into reflected and reflecting 
and in turn divides the dyad refiected-reflecting into (reflect- 
ed-reflecting) reflected and (refiected-reflecting) reflecting. 
Here the negation is divided into two internal and opposed 
negations; each is an internal negation, but they are never- 
theless separated from one another by an inapprehensible 
external nothingness. In fact since each of them is exhausted 
in denying that one for-itself is the other and since each n^ 
gation is wholly engaged in that being which it has to be, it 
is no longer in command of itself so as to deny concerning 
itself that it is the opposite negation. Here suddenly appears 
the' given, not as the result of an identity of being-in-itself 
but as a sort of phantom of exteriority which neither of the 



THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


397 


negations has to be and which yet separates them. Actually 
in the reflective being we have already found the beginning 
of this negative inversion. In fact the reflective as a witness 
is profoundly affected in its being by its reflectivity, and con- 
sequently in so far as it makes itself reflective, it aims at not 
being the reflected-on. But reciprocally the reflected-on is 
^elf-consciousness as the reflected-on consciousness of this or 
that transcendent phenomenon. We said of it that it knows 
itself looked-at. In this sense it aims on its part at not- 
being the reflective since every consciousness is defined by 
its negativity. But this tendency to a double schism was re- 
covered and stifled by the fact that in spite of everything 
the reflective had to be the reflected-on and that the reflected- 
on had to be the reflective. The double negation remained 
evanescent.' 

In the case of the third ekstasis we behold a reflective 
scissiparity pushed further. The results may surprise us: on 
the one hand, since the negations are effected in interiority, 
the Other and myself can not come to one another from the 
outside. It is necessary that there be a being “I-and-the-Other” 
which has to be the reciprocal scissiparity of the for-others 
just as the totality “reflective-reflected-on” is a being which 
has to be its own nothingness; that is, my self ness and that 
of the Other are structures of one and the same totality of 
being. Thus Hegel appears to be right: the point of view 
of the totality is the point of view of being, the true point 
of view. Everything happens as if my self ness confront- 
ing that of the Other were produced and maintained by a 
totality which would push its own nihilation to the extreme; 
being-for-others appears to be the prolongation of the pure 
reflective scissiparity. In this sense everything happens as 
if the Other and myself indicated the vain effort of a total- 
ity of for-itself to reapprehend itself and to envelop what 
it has to be in the pure and simple mode of the in-itself. 
This effort to reapprehend itself as object is pushed here to 
the limit— that is, well beyond the reflective division — 
and would produce a result precisely the reverse of the end 
toward which this totality would project itself. By its effort 
to be self-consciousness the totality-for-itself would be con- 
stituted in the face of the self as a self-as-consciousness 
which has to not-be the self of which it is consciousness. Con- 
versely the self-as-object in order to be would have to experi- 
ence itself as made-to-be by and for a consciousness which 


398 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

it has to not-be if it wishes to be. Thus would be bora 
L schism of the for-others, and this dichotomic division 
wild be repeated to infinity in order to constitute a plural- 
ity of consciousnesses as fragments of a radical explosion, 
“^ere would be” numerous Others as the Jesuit of 
a faUure the reverse of the reflective failure. In reflection m 
fact if I do not succeed in apprehendmg myself as an object 
but only as a quasi-object, tliis is because I am the object 
which I wish to grasp; I have to be the 
separates me from myself. I can escape my selfness nei&er 
by taking a point of view on myself (for thus I do not su - 
ceed in realizing myself as being) nor by apprehendmg my- 
self in the form of the “there is” (here the recovery fails be- 
cause the recoverer is to himself the recovered). In the case 
of being-for-others, on the contrary, the scissiparity is pus e 
further; the (reflection-reflecting) reflected is radically dis- 
tinct from the (reflection-reflecting) reflecting and ^eby 
can be an object for it. But this time the recovery fads be- 
cause the recovered is not the one recovering. Thus me o 
tality which is not what it is but which is what it is not, 
would— as the result of a radical attempt at wrenchmg away 
from self — everywhere produce its being as an “elsewhere. 
The scattering of being-in-itself of a shattered totality, always 
elsewhere, always at a distance, never in itself, but always 
maintained in being by the perpetual explosion of this to i y 
— such would be the being of others and of myself as other. 

But on the other hand, simultaneously with my negation 
of myself, the Other denies concerning himself that he is 
me. These two negations are equally indispensable to being 
for-others, and they can not be reunited by , any synthesis. 
This is not because an external nothingness would have sep 
arated them at the start but rather because the in-itself wo 
recapture each one in relation to the other by the mere 
that each one is not the other without having to not-be m€ 
other. There is here a kind of limit of the for-itself whic 
stems from the for-itself itself but which qua l^t ^ inde- 
pendent of the for-itself. We rediscover something like /flo- 
ticity and we can not conceive how the totality of which w« 
were speaking earlier would have been able at the very hear 
of the most radical wrenching away to produce in its beinj 
a nothingness which it in no way has to be. In fact it seem, 
that this nothingness has slipped into this totality in ordei 
to shatter it just as in the atomism of Leucippus non-bemj 


THE EXISTENCE OF OTHERS 


399 


slips into the Parmenidean totality of being and makes it 
explode into atoms. Therefore it represents the negation of 
any synthetic totality in terms of which one might claim to 
understand the plurality of consciousnesses. Of course it is 
inapprehensible since it is produced neither by the Other 
nor by myself, nor by any intermediary, for we have estab- 
lished that consciousnesses experience one another without 
intermediary. Of course where we directed our sight, we en- 
countered as the object of our description only a pure and 
simple internal negation. Yet it is there in the irreducible 
fact that there is a duality of negations. It is not, to be sure, 
the foundation of the multiplicity of consciousnesses, for if 
it existed before this multiplicity, it would make all being- 
for others impossible. On the contrary, we must conceive of 
it as the expression of this multiplicity; it appears with this 
multiplicity. But since there is nothing which can found it, 
neither a particular consciousness nor a totality exploding 
into consciousnesses, it appears as a pure, irreducible con- 
tingency. It is the fact that my denial that I am the Other is 
not sufficient to make the Other exist, but that the Other 
must simultaneously with my own negation deny that he is 
me. This is the facticity of being-for-others. 

Thus we arrive at this contradictory conclusion: being-for- 
others can be only if it is made-to-be by a totality which is 
lost so that being-for-others may arise, a position which 
would lead us to postulate the existence and directing power 
of the mind. But on the other hand, tliis being-for-others 
can exist only if it involves an inapprehensible and external 
non-being wMch no totality, not even the mind, can pro- 
duce or found. In one sense the existence of a plurality of 
consciousnesses can not be a primary fact and it refers us to 
an original fact of a wrenching away from self, a fact of the 
mind. Thus the question “Why is there a plurality of con- 
sciousnesses?” could receive an answer. But in another sense 
the facticity of this plurality seems to be irreducible; and if 
the mind is considered from the standpoint of the fact of 
the plurality, it vanishes. Then the metaphysical question 
no longer has meaning; we have encountered a fundamental 
contingency, and we can answer only by “So it is.” Thus 
the original ekstasis is deepened; it appears that we can not 
make it a part of nothingness. The for-itself has appeared 
to us as a being which exists in so far as it is not what it 
is and is what it is not. The ekstatic totality of the mind is 



400 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


not simply a totality detotalized; it appears to us as a shat- 
tered being concerning which we can neither say that it ex- 
ists nor that it does not exist. Thus our description has en- 
abled us to satisfy the preliminary conditions which we have 
posited for any theory about the existence of the Other. 
The multiplicity of consciousnesses appears to us as a syn- 
thesis and not as a collection, but it is a synthesis whose 
totality is inconceivable. 


Is this to say that the antinomic character of the totality 
is itself an irreducible? Or from a higher point of view can 
we make it disappear? Ought we to posit that the mind is 
the being which is and is not just as we posited that the for- 
itself is what it is not and is not what it is? The question 
has no meaning. It is supposing that it is possible for us to 
take a point of view on the totality; that is, to consider it 
from outside. But this is impossible precisely because I exist 
as nayself on the foundation of this totality and to the ex- 
tent ^that I am engaged in it. No consciousness, not even 
God s, can see the underside” — -that is, apprehend the to- 
tality as such. For if God is consciousness, he is integrated 
m the totality. And if by his nature, he is a being beyond 
consciousness (that is, an in-itself which would be its own 
foundation) still the totality can appear to him only as ob- 
ject (in that case he lacks the totality’s internal disintegra- 
tion as the subjective effort to reapprehend the self) or as 
su ject (then since God is not this subject, he can only ex- 
perience it without knowing it). Thus no point of view on 
me totality is conceivable; the totality has no “outside,” and 
me very question of the meaning of the “underside” is 
striped of meaning. We can not go further. 

we have arrived at the end of this exposition. We 
®^rned that me Other’s existence -was experienced with 
vidence in and through me fact of my objectivity. We 
^ reaction to my own alienation for me 

Tn ™ grasping the Other as an object. 

Deripnr-p’ r,- ^^^st for us in two forms: if I ex- 

him evidence, I fail to know him; if I know 

his TirnK M ^ reach his being-as-object and 

mesfs of existence in me midst of the world. No syn- 

here Thic two forms is possible. But we can not stop 

which T a ° which the Other is for me and this object 

men k mv manifested each as a body. What 

men is my body? What is me body of me Omer? 



CHAPTER TWO 


The Body 


The problem of the body and its relations with consciousness 
is often obscured by the fact that while the body is from the 
start posited as a certain thing having its own laws and 
capable of being defined from outside, consciousness is then 
reached by the type of inner intuition which is peculiar to it. 
Actually if after grasping “my” consciousness in its absolute 
interiority and by a series of reflective acts, I then seek to 
unite it with a certain living object composed of a nervous 
system, a brain, glands, digestive, respiratory, and circulatory 
organs whose very matter is capable of being analyzed chem- 
ically into atoms of hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, 
etc., then I am going to encounter insurmountable difficul- 
ties. But these difficulties all stem from the fact that I try to 
unite my consciousness not with my body but with the body 
of others. In fact the body which I have just described is not 
my body such as it is for me. I have never seen and never 
shall see my brain nor my endocrine glands. But because I who 
am a man have seen the cadavers of men dissected, because I 
have read articles on* physiology, I conclude that my body is 
constituted exactly like all those which have been shown to 
me on the dissection table or of which I have seen colored 
drawings in books. Of course the physicians who have taken 
care of me, the surgeons who have operated on me, have been 
able to have direct experience with the body which I myself 
do not know. I do not disagree with them, I do not claim 


401 



402 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

that I lack a brain, a heart, or a stomach. But it is most impor- 
tant to choose the order of our bits of knowledge. So far as 
the physicians have had any experience with my body, it was 
with my body in the midst of the world and as it is for others. 
My body as it is for me does not appear to me in the midst 
of the world. Of course during a radioscopy I was able to see 
the picture of my vertebrae on a screen, but I was outside in 
the midst of the world. I was apprehending a wholly consti- 
tuted object as a this among other thises, and it was only by a 
reasoning process that I referred it back to being mine; it was 
much more my property than my being. 

It is true that I see and touch my legs and my hands. 
Moreover nothing prevents me from imagining an arrange- 
ment of the sense organs such that a living being could see 
one of his eyes while the eye which was seen was directing 
its glance upon the world. But it is to be noted that in this 
case again I am the Other in relation to my eye. 1 apprehend 
it as a sense organ constituted in the world in a particular 
way, but I can not “see the seeing”; that is, I can not appre- 
hend it in the process of revealing an aspect of the world to 
me. Either it is a thing among other things, or else it is that 
by which things are revealed to me. But it can not be both at 
the same time. Similarly I see my hand touching objects, but 
do not know it in its act of touching them. This is the funda- 
mental reason why that famous “sensation of effort” of 
Maine de Biran does not really exist. For my hand reveals to 
me the resistance of objects, their hardness or softness, but 
not itself. Thus I see my hand only in the way that I see this 
inkwell. I unfold a distance between it and me, and this dis- 
tance comes to integrate itself in the distances which I estab- 
lish among all the objects of the world. When a doctor takes 
my wounded leg and looks at it while I, half raised up on my 
bed, watch him do it, there is no essential difference between 
the visual perception which I have of the doctor’s body and 
that which I have of my own leg. Better yet, they are dis- 
tinguished only as different structures of a single global 
perception; there is no essential difference between the doc- 
of my leg and my own present perception of 
Uf course "when I touch my leg with my finger, I realize 
at my leg is touched. But this phenomenon of double sensa- 
on IS not essential: cold, a shot of morphine, can make it 
isappe^. This shows that we are dealing with two essen- 
tially different orders of reality. To touch and to be touched. 


THE BODY 


403 


to feel that one is touching and to feel that one is touched 
— these are two species of phenomena which it is useless to 
try to reunite by the term “double sensation.” In fact they 
are radically distinct, and they exist on two incommunicable 
levels. Moreover when I touch my leg or when I see it, I sur- 
pass it toward my own possibilities. It is, for example, in 
order to pull on my trousers or to change a dressing on my 
wound. Of course I can at the same time arrange my leg in 
such a way that I can more conveniently “work” on it. But 
this does' not change the fact that I transcend it toward the 
pure possibility of “curing myself” and that consequently I 
am present to it without its being me and without my being it. 
What I cause to exist here is the thing “leg”; it is not the 
leg as the possibility which I am of walking, running, or of 
playing football. 

Thus to the extent that my body indicates my possibili- 
ties in the world, seeing my body or touching it is to trans- 
form these possibilities of mine into dead-possibilities. This 
metamorphosis must necessarily involve a complete thisness 
with regard to the body as a living possibility of running, of 
dancing, etc. Of course, the discovery of my body as an object 
is indeed a revelation of its being. But &e being which is 
thus revealed to me is its being-for-others. That this confu- 
sion may lead to absurdities can be clearly seen in connection 
with the famous problem of “inverted vision.” We know the 
question posed by the physiologists: “How can we set up- 
right the objects which are painted upside down on our 
retina?” We know as well the answer of the philosophers: 
“There is no problem. An object is upright or inverted in rela- 
hon to the rest of the universe. To perceive the whole universe 
inverted means nothing, for it would have to be inverted in 
relation to something,” But what particularly interests us is 
the origin of this false problem. It is the fact that people have 
wanted to link my consciousness of objects to the body of the 
Other. Here are the candle, the crystalline lens, the inverted 
unage on the screen of the retina. But to be exact, the retina 
enters here into a physical system; it is a screen and only that; 
the crystalline lens is a lens and only a lens; both are homo- 
geneous in their being with the candle which completes the 
system. Therefore we have deliberately chosen the physical 
pomt of view — i.e., the point of view of the outside, of ex- 
eriority ^in order to study the problem of vision; we have 
considered a dead eye in the midst of the visible world in 



404 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


order to account for the visibility of this world. Con- 
sequently, how can we be surprised later when conscious- 
ness, which is absolute interiority, refuses to allow itself to 
be bound to this object? The relations which I establish be- 
tween the Other’s body and the external object are really 
existing relations, but they have for their being the being of 
the for-others; they suppose a center of inlra-mundane flow in 
which knowledge is a magic property of space, “action at a 
distance.” From the start they are placed in the perspective 
of the Other-aS'Object. 

If then we wish to reflect on the nature of the body, it is 
necessary to establish an order of our reflections which con- 
forms to the order of being: we can not continue to confuse 
the ontological levels, and we must in succession examine the 
body first as being-for-itself and then as being-for-others. And 
in order to avoid such absurdities as “inverted vision,” we 
must keep constantly in mind the idea that since these two 
aspects of the body are on different and incommunicable levels 
of being, they can not be reduced to one another. Being-for- 
itself must be wholly body and it must be wholly conscious- 
n^s; it^ can not be united with a body. SimUarly being-for- 
mers IS wholly body; there are no “psychic phenomena” 
thermo be united with the body. There is nothing behind 
the body. But the body is wholly “psychic.” We must now 

^oceed to study these two modes of being which we find for 
the body. 


I. THE BODY AS BEING-FOR-ITSELF: 
FACTICITY 

It appears at first glance that the preceding observations are 
opposed to the givens of the Cartesian cogito. “The soul is 
know than the body,” said Descartes. Thereby he 
^ radical distinction between the facts of 
nf ^ accessible to reflection, and the facts 

diVino knowledge of which must be guaranteed by 

itc oTii L appears at first that reflection reveals to 

^ facts of consciousness. Of course on this level 
thf>Tnco,T°^” phenomena which appear to include within 
the tinrnmf With the body: “physical” pain, 

less mvr ^ pleasure, etc. But these phenomena are no , 
less pure facts of consciousness. There is a tendency therefore 



THE BODY 


405 


to. make signs out of them, ajffections of consciousness 
occasioned by the body, without realizing that one has thereby 
irremediably driven the body out of consciousness and that no 
bond will ever be able to reunite this body, which is already a 
body-for-others, with the consciousness which, it is claimed, 
makes the body manifest. 

Furthermore we ought not to take this as our point of 
departure but rather our primary relation to the in-itself: our 
being-in-the-world. We know that there is not a for-itself on 
the one hand and a world on the other as two closed entities 
for which we must subsequently seek some explanation as to 
how they communicate. The for-itself is a relation to the 
I world. The for-itself, by denying that it is being, makes there 
be a world, and by surpassing this negation toward its own 
possibilities it reveals the “thises” as instrumental-things. 

But when we say that the for-itself is-in-the-world, that 
consciousness is consciousness of the world, we must be care- 
ful to remember that the world exists confronting conscious- 
ness as an indefinite multiplicity of reciprocal relations which 
consciousness surveys without perspective and contemplates 
without a point of view. For me, this glass is to the left of 
the decanter and a little behind it; for Pierre, it is to the 
right and a little in front. It is not even conceivable that a 
consciousness could survey the world in such a way that the 
glass should be simultaneously given to it at the right and at 
the left of the decanter, in front of it and behind it. This is 
by no means the consequence of a strict application of the 
principle of identity but because this fusion of right and left, 
of before and behind, would result in the total disappearance 
of '^thises” at the heart of a primitive indistinction. Similarly 
if the table leg hides the designs in the rug from my sight, 
this is not the result of some finitude and some imperfection 
in ny visual organs, but it is because a rug which would not 
be hidden by the table, a rug which would not be either under 
It or above it or to one side of it, would not have any relation 
^ any kind with the table and would no longer belong to 
the “world”, in which there is the table. The in-itself which 
IS made manifest in the form of the this would return to its 
indifferent self-identity. Even space as a purely external rela- 
tion would disappear. The constitution of space as a multi- 
plicity of reciprocal relations can be effected only from the 
abstract point of view of science; it can not be lived, it can 
not even be represented. The triangle which I trace on the 



406 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


blackboard so as to help me in abstract reasoning is necessarily 
to the right of the circle tangent to one of its sides, necessarily 
to the extent that it is on the blackboard. And my effort is to 
surpass the concrete characteristics of the figure traced in 
chalk by not including its relation to me in my calculations 
any more than the thickness of the lines or the imperfection of 
the drawing. 

Thus by the mere fact that there is a world, this world 
can not exist without a univocal orientation in relation to me. 
Idealism has rightly insisted on the fact that relation makes 
the world. But since idealism took its position on the ground 
of Newtonian science, it conceived this relation as a relation 


of reciprocity. Thus it attained only abstract concepts of pure 
exteriority, of action and reaction, etc., and due to this very 
fact it missed the world and succeeded only in making ex- 
plicit the limiting concept of absolute objectivity. This con- 
cept in short amounted to that of a “desert worleT' or of “a 


world without men”; that is, to a contradiction, since it is 
through hurtian reality that there is a world. Thus the concept 
of objectivity, which aimed at replacing the in-itself of'dog- 
matic truth by a pure relation of reciprocal agreement between 
representations, is self-destructive if pushed to the limit. 

Moreover the progress of science has led to rejecting 
this notion of absolute objectivity. What Broglie is led to call 
experience” is a system of 'univocal relations from which the 
observer is not excluded. If microphysics can reintegrate the 
observer into the heart of the scientific system, this is not by 
virtue of pure subjectivity — this notion would have no 
more meaning than that of pure' objectivity — but as an orig- 
inal relation to the world, as a place, as that toward which 
all envisaged relations are oriented. Tius, for example, Hei- 
sen erg s principle of indeterminacy can hot be considered 
eit er as an invalidation or a validation of the determinist 
postulate. Instead of (being a pure connection between things, 

1 includes within itself the original relation of man to 
place in the world. This is sufficiently demon- 
ra ed, for example, by the fact that we cannot make the 
imensions of bodies in motion increase in proportionate 
without changing their relative speed. If I examine 
eve toward another first with the naked 

hundred ^ '"^'^roscope, it will appear to me a 

body in mntinn second case; for although the 

on approaches no closer to the body toward 



THE BODY 


407 


which it is moving, it has in the same time traversed a space 
a hundred times as large. Thus the notion of speed no longer 
means an5dhing unless it is speed in relation to given dimen- 
sions of a body in motion. But it is we ourselves who decide 
these dimensions by our very upsurge into the world and it is 
very necessary that we decide them, for otherwise they would 
not be at all. Thus they are relative not to the knowledge 
which we get of- them but to our primary engagement at the 
heart of the world. 

This fact is expressed perfectly by the theory of relativity: 
an observer placed at the heart of a system can not determine 
by any experiment whether the system is at rest or in mo- 
tion. But this relativity is not a “relativism”; it has nothing to 
do with knowledge; better yet, it implies the dogmatic postu- 
late according to which knowledge releases to us what is. The 
relativity of modern science aims at being. Man and the 
world are relative beings, and the principle of their being is 
the relation. It follows that the first relation proceeds from 
human-reality to the world. To come into existence, for me, is 
to unfold my distances from things and thereby to cause 
things “to be there.” But consequently things are precisely 
“things-which-exist-at-a-distance-from-me.” Thus the world 
refers to me that univocal relation which is my being and by 
which I cause it to be revealed. 

The point of yiew of pure knowledge is contradictory; there 
is only the point of view of engaged knowledge. This amounts 
to saying that knowledge and action are only two abstract 
aspects of an original, concrete relation. The real space of the 
world is the space which Lewin calls “hodological.” A pure 
knowledge in fact would be a knowledge without a point of 
view; therefore a knowledge of the world but on principle 
located outside the world. But this makes no sense; the know- 
ing being would be only knowledge since he would be defined 
by his object and since his object would disappear in the total 
indistinction of reciprocal relations. Thus knowledge can be 
only an engaged upsurge in a determined point of view which 
one is. For human reality, to be is to-be-there; that is, “there 
in that chair,” “there at that table,” “there at the top of that 
mountain, with these dimensions, this orientation, etc" It is 
an ontological necessity. 

This point must be well understood. For this necessity ap- 
pears between two contingencies: on the one hand, while it 
is necessary that I be in the form of being-there, still it is 



408 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


altogether contingent that I be, for I am not the foundation of 
my being; on the other hand, while it is necessary that I be 
engaged in this or that point of view, it is contingent that it 
should be precisely in this view to the exclusion of all others. 
This twofold contingency which embraces a necessity we have 
called the facticity of the for-itsclf. We have described it in 
Part Two. We showed there that the nihilated in-itself, 
engulfed in the absolute event which is the appearance of the 
foundation or the upsurge of the for-itself, remains at the 
heart of the for-itself as its original contingency. Thus the for- 
itself is supported by a perpetual contingency for which it be- 
comes responsible and which it assimilates without ever being 
able to suppress it. Nowhere can the for-itsclf find this con- 
tingency anywhere within itself; nor can the for-itself any- 
where apprehend and know it — not even by the reflective 
cogito. The for-itself forever surpasses this contingency to- 
ward its own possibilities, and it encounters in itself only the 
nothingness which it has to be. Yet facticity does not cease to 
haunt the for-itself, and it is facticity which causes me to 
apprehend myself simultaneously as totally responsible for my 
being and as totally unjustifiable. 

, world refers to me the image of this unjustifi- 

ability m the forrn of the synthetic unity of its univocal re- 
lations to me. It is absolutely necessary that the world ap- 
pear to me in order . And in this sense this order is me; it is 
mat image of me which we described in the last chapter of 
Fart Two. But it is wholly contingent that it should be this 
appears as the necessary and totally unjustifi- 
able arrangement of the totality of being. This absolutely 
necessary and totally unjustifiable order of the things of the 
wor , this order which is myself in so far as I am neither 
e oundation of my being nor the foundation of a par- 

order is the body as it is on the level of 
me ror-itselt. In this sense we could define the body as the 
con nxgenf /omi which is assumed by the necessity of my 
. T^e body is nothing other than the for-itself; 

ib-itself in the for-itself, for in that case it would 
^ But it is the fact that the for-itself is not 

«!ifv 9^pdation, and this fact is expressed by the neces- 

engaged, contingent being among other 

situation nf distinct from the 

to be sifiint ^ for-itself since for the for-itself, to exist and 
e are one and the same; on the other hand the 



THE BODY 


409 


body is identified with the whole world inasmuch as the 
world is the total situation of the for-itself and the measure 
of its existence. 

But a situation is not a pure contingent given. Quite the 
contrary, it is revealed only to the extent that the for-itself 
surpasses it toward itself. Consequently the body-for-itself is 
never a given which I can know. It is there everywhere as 
the surpassed; it exists only in so far as I escape it by nihilat- 
ing myself. The body is what I nihilate. It is the in-itself 
which is surpassed by the nihilating for-itself and which re- 
apprehends the for-itself in this very surpassing. It is the 
fact that I am my own motivation without being my own 
foundation, the fact that I am nothing without having to be 
what I am and yet in so far as I have to be what I am, I 
am without having to be. In one sense therefore the body is 
a necessary characteristic of the for-itself; it is not true that 
the body is the product of an arbitrary decision on the part 
of a demiurge nor that the union of soul and body is the 
contingent bringing together of two substances radically dis- 
tinct. On the contrary, the very nature of the for-itself de- 
mands that it be body; that is, that its nihilating escape from 
being should be made in the form of an engagement in the 
world. Yet in another sense the body manifests my contin- 
gency; we can even say that it is only this contingency. The 
Ca^rtesian rationalists were right in being struck with this 
characteristic; in fact it represents the individualization of 
my engagement in the world. And Plato was not wrong ei- 
ther in taking the body as that which individualizes the soul. 
Yet it would be in vain to suppose that the soul can detach 
itself from this individualization by separating itself from 
the body at death or by pure thought, for the soul is the 
body inasmuch as the for-itself is its own individualization. 

We shall understand the bearing of these remarks better 
if we try to apply them to the problem of sense knowledge. 

The problem of sense knowledge is raised on the occasion 
of the appearance in the midst of the world of certain ob- 
jects which we call the senses. First we established that the 
Other had eyes; later as physiologists dissected cadavers, they 
learned the structure of these objects; they distinguished the 
cornea from the crystalline lens and the lens from the retina. 
They established that the object, crystalline lens, was classed 
in a family of particular objects — ^lenses — and that they could 
apply to the object of their study those laws of geometric 



410 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


optics which concern lenses. More precise dissections effected 
progressively as surgical instruments were perfected, have 
taught us that a bundle of nerves leave the retina and end 
up in the brain. With the microscope we have examined the 
nerves of cadavers and have determined exactly their trajec- 
tory, their point of departure, and their point of arrival. 
The totality of these pieces of knowledge concerned there- 
fore a certain spatial object called the eye; they implied the 
existence of space and of the world. In addition they im- 
plied that we could see this eye, and touch it; that is, we are 
ourselves provided with a sensible point of view on things. 
Finally between our knowledge of the eye and the eye itself 
are interposed all our technical knowledge (the art of mak- 
ing our scalpels, our lancets) and our scientific skills (e.g., 
geometric optics, which enables us to construct and use mi- 


croscopes). In short, between me and the eye which I dissect 
there is interposed the whole world such as I make it appear 
by my very upsurge. Later a more thorough examination has 
enabled us to establish the existence of various nerve end- 
ings on the surface of our body. We have even succeeded in 
acting separately on certain of these endings and performing 
experiments on living subjects. We then found ourselves in 
the presence of two objects in the world: on the one hand 
the stimulant; on the other hand the sensitive cell or the 
free nerve ending which we stimulated. The stimulant was 
a physical-chemical object, an electric current, a mechanical 
or chemical agent whose properties we knew with precision 
an which we could vary in intensity or in duration in a 
e nite way. Therefore we were dealing with two mundane 
r their intra-mundane relation could be estab- 

is e y our own senses or by means of instruments. The 
now edge of this relation once again supposed a whole sys- 
em o scientific and technical skills, in short, the existence 
^ original upsurge into the world. Our em- 

£.1 ormation enabled us, furthermore, to conceive a 

inside” of the Other-as-object and the 
fnrt ^ these objective establishments. We learned in 

certain senses we “provoked a modifi- 
innn ^ Others consciousness. We learned this through 
„ through the meaningful and objective 

nhvsioi^^ ^ Physical object (the stimulant), a 

object (sense), a psychic object (the Other), 
x ^ estations ofv meaning (language) : , such are 



THE BODY 


411 


the terms of the objective relation which we wished to es- 
tablish. But not one of them could enable us to get out of 
the world of objects. 

On occasion I have served as subject for the research work 
of physiologists or psychologists. K I volunteered for some 
experiment of this kind, I found myself suddenly in a lab- 
oratory where I perceived a more or less illuminated screen, 
or else felt tiny electric shocks, or I was brushed by an ob- 
ject which I could not exactly determine but whose global 
presence I grasped as in the midst of the world and over 
against me. Not for an instant was I isolated from the world; 
all these events happened for me in a laboratory in the mid- 
dle of Paris, in the south building of the Sorbonne. I re- 
mained in the Other’s presence, and the very meaning of 
the experiment demanded that I could communicate with 
him through language. From time to time the experimenter 
asked me if the screen appeared to me more or less illumi- 
nated, if the pressure exerted on my hand seemed to me 
stronger or weaker, and I replied; that is, I gave objective 
information concerning things which appeared in the midst 
of my world. Sometimes an inept experimenter asked me if 
“my sensation of light was stronger or weaker, more or less 
intense.” Since I was in the midst of objects and in the 
process of observing these objects, his phrase would have 
had no meaning for me if I had not long since learned to 
use the expression “sensation of light” for objective light as 
it appeared to me in the world at a given instant. I replied 
therefore that the sensation of light was, for example, less 
intense, but I meant by this that the screen was in my opin- 
ion less illuminated. Since I actually apprehended the screen 
as less illuminated, the phrase “in my opinion” correspond- 
ed to nothing real except to an attempt not to confuse the 
objectivity of the world-for-me with a stricter objectivity, 
which is the result of experimental measures and of the 
agreement of minds with each other. What I could know in 
each case was a certain object which die experimenter ob- 
served during this time and which was my visual organ or 
certain tactile endings. Therefore the result obtained at the 
end of the experiment could be only the relating of two 
series of objects: those which were revealed to me during 
the experiment and those which were revealed during the 
same period to the experimenter. The illumination of the 
screen belonged to my world; my eyes as objective organs 



412 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


/ 

belonged to the world of the experimenter. The connection 
of these two series was held to be like a bridge between two 
worlds; under no circumstances could it be a table of correla- 
tion between the subjective and the objective. 

Why indeed should we use the term “subjectivity” for the 
ensemble of luminous or heavy or odorous objects such as 
they appeared to me in this laboratory at Paris on a day in 
February, etc? And if despite all we are to consider this en- 
semble as subjective, then why should we recognize objec- 
tivity in the system of objects which were revealed simulta- 
neously to the experimenter, in this laboratory, this same 
day in February? We do not have two weights or two mea- 
sures here; we do not encounter anywhere anything which is 
given as purely felt, as experienced for me without objecti- 
vation. Here as always I am conscious of the world, and on 
the ground of the world I am conscious of certain tran- 
scendent objects. As always I surpass what is revealed to me 
toward the possibility which I have to be — for example, to- 
ward that of replying correctly to the experimenter and of 
enabling the experiment to succeed. Of course these com- 
parisons can give certain objective results: for example, I 
can establish that the warm water appears cold to me when 
I put my hand in it after having first plunged my hand in 
hot water. But this establishment which we pompously call 
the law of relativity of sensations” has nothing to do with 
s^sations. Actually we are dealing with a quality of the 
object which is revealed to me: the warm water is cold when 
^ submerge my heated hand in it. A comparison of this ob- 
jertxw quality of the water to equally objective information 
wmch the thermometer gives me simply reveals to me a con- 
adiction. This contradiction motivates on my part a free 
c oice of true objectivity. I shall give the name subjectivity 
o he objectivity which I have not chosen. As for the rea- 
sons for the ‘relativity of sensations,” a further examination 
w reveal thern to me in certain objective, synthetic struc- 
mres which I shall call forms (Gestalt). The Miiller-Lyers 
^lon, the relativity of the senses, etc., are so many names 
^ ^ o objective laws concerning the structures of these 
laws teach us nothing about appearances, but 
synthetic structures. I intervene here only to 
upsurge into the world gives birth to this 
of objects with each other. As such 
revea ed as forms. Scientific objectivity consists in 



THE BODY 


413 


considering the structures separately by isolating them from 
the whole; hence they appear with other characteristics. But 
in no case do we get out of an existing world. In the same 
way we might show that what is called the “threshold of 
sensation” or the specificity of the senses is referred back to 
pure determinations of objects as such. 

Yet some have claimed that this objective relation of the 
stimulant to the sense organ is itself surpassed toward a re- 
lation of the objective (stimulant-sense organ) to the sub- 
jective (pure sensation) and that this subjective is defined 
by the action exercised on us by the stimulant through the 
intermediary of the sense organ. The sense organ appears 
to us to be affected by the stimulant; the protoplasmic and 
physical-chemical modifications which appear in the sense 
organ are not actually produced by that organ; they come to 
it from the outside. At least we assert this in order to remain 
faithful to the principle of inertia which constitutes all na- 
ture as exteriority. Therefore when we establish a correlation 
between the objective system (stimulant-sensory organ) which 
we presently perceive, and the subjective systern which for 
us is the ensemble of the internal properties of the other- 
object, then we are compelled to admit that the new mo- 
dality which has just appeared in this subjectivity in connec- 
tion with the stimulation of the sense is also produced by 
something other than itself. If it were produced spontane- 
ously, in fact, it would immediately be cut off from all con- 
nection with the organ stimulated, or if you prefer, the re- 
lation which could be established between them would be 
anything whatsoever. Therefore we shall conceive of an ob- 
jective unity corresponding to even the tiniest and shortest 
of perceptible stimulations, and we shall call it sensation. 
We shall endow this unity with inertia; that is, it will be 
pure exteriority since, conceived in terms of the “this” it 
will participate in the exteriority of the in-itself. This ex- 
teriority which is projected into the heart of the sensation 
touches it almost in its very existence; its reason for being 
and the occasion of its existence are outside of it. It is there- 
fore an exteriority to itself. At the same time its raison 
d’etre does not reside in any “internal” fact of the same 
nature as it but in a real object (the stimulant) and in the 
change which affects another real object (the sense organ). 
Nevertheless as it remains inconceivable that a certain being 
existing on a certain level of being and incapable of being 



414 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


supported in being by itself alone can be determined to exist 
by an existent standing on a plane of being which is radical- 
ly distinct, I must in order to support the sensation and in 
order to furnish it with being, conceive of an environment 
which is homogeneous with it and constituted likewise in 
exteriority. This environment I call mind or sometimes even 
consciousness. But I conceive of this consciousness as an 
Other’s consciousness — ^that is, as an object. Nonetheless as 
the relations which I wish to establish between the sense 


organ and the sensation must be universal, I posit that the 
consciousness thus conceived must be also my consciousness, 
not for the other but in itself. Thus I have determined a 
sort of internal space in which certain figures called, sensa- 
tions are formed on the occasion of external stimulations. 


Since this space is pure passivity, I declare that it suffers its 
sensations. But I do not thereby mean only that it is the in- 
ternal environment which serves as matrix for them. I am 
inspired at present with a biological vision of the world 
which I bon'ow for my objective conception of the sensory 
organ considered, and I claim that this internal space lives 
Its sensation. Thus /i/e is a magical connection which I es- 
tabhsh between a passive environment and a passive mode 
of this environment. The mind does not produce its own 
sensations and hence they remain exterior to it; but on the 
ottier hand, it appropriates them to itself by living them, 
^e unity of the “lived” and the “living” is no longer in- 
eed a spatial juxtaposition nor a relation of content to con- 
tainer, it is a magical inherence. The mind is its own sensa- 
tions while remaining distinct from them. Thus sensation 
ecomes a particular type of object — inert, passive, and sim- 
p y ived. Behold us now obliged to bestow on it absolute 
su jectivity. But the word “subjectivity” must be correctly 
‘ does not mean here the belonging to a sub- 

mu* which spontaneously motivates it- 

® subjectivity of the psychologist is of an entirely 
contrary, it manifests inertia and the 
ence or all transcendence. That is subjective which can 
itself. And precisely to the extent that sensa- 
in m pure exteriority, can be only an impression 

Stc ®^tent that it is only itself, only 

nnt which IS formed by an eddy in psychic space, it is 

fered purely and simply that which is suf- 

^ > simp e determination of our receptivity. It is sub- 



THE BODY 


415 


jectivity because it is neither presentative nor representative. 
The subjective quality of the Other-as-object is purely and 
simply a closed box. Sensation is inside the box. 

Such is the notion of sensation. We can see its absurdity. 
First of all, it is pure fiction. It does not correspond to any- 
thing which I experience in myself or with regard to the 
Other. We have apprehended only the objective universe; all 
our personal determinations suppose the world and arise as 
relations to the world. Sensation supposes that man is already 
in the world since he is provided with sense organs, and it 
appears in him as the pure cessation of his relations with the 
world. At the same time this pure “subjectivity” is given as 
the necessary basis on which all these transcendent relations 
which its appearance has just caused to disappear will have to 
be reconstructed. Thus we meet with these three stages of 
thought: 

. (1) In order to establish sensations we must proceed on the 
basis of a certain realism; thus we take as valid our perception 
of the Other, the Other’s senses, and inductive instruments. 

(2) " But on the level of sensation all this realism dis- 
appears; sensation, a modification which one suffers, gives 
us information only about ourselves; it belongs with the 
“lived.” 

(3) Nevertheless it is sensation which I give as the basis 
of my knowledge of the external world. This basis could not 
be the foundation of a real contact with things; it does not 
allow us to conceive of an intentional structure of the mind. 

We are to use the term objectivity not for an immediate 
connection with being but for certain combinations of sensa- 
tions which will present more permanence or more regularity 
or which will accord better with the ensemble of our repre- 
sentations. In particular it is thus that we shall have to define 
perception of the Other, the Other’s sense organs, and in- 
ductive instruments. We are dealing with subjective forma- 
tions of a particular coherence — that • is all. On this level 
there can be no question of explaining my sensation by the 
sense organ as I perceive it in the Other or in myself; quite 
the contrary, it is the sense organ which I explain as a certain 
association of my sensations. We can see the inevitable circle. 
My perception of the Other’s senses serves me as a foundation 
for an explanation of sensations and in particular of my sensa- 
tions, but reciprocally my sensations thus conceived constitute 
the only reality of my perception of the Other’s senses. In 



416 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


this circle the same object — ^the Other’s sense organ — main- 
tains neither the same nature nor the same truth throughout 
each of its appearances. It is at first reality, and then because 
it is reality it founds a doctrine which contradicts it. In 
appearance the structure of the classical theory of sensation 
is exactly that of the Cynic argument of the Liar in that it is 
precisely because the Cretan tells the truth that he is found 
to be lying. But in addition, as we have just seen, a sensation 
is pure subjectivity. How are we supposed to construct an 
object out of subjectivity? No synthetic grouping can confer 
an objective quality on what is on principle of the nature of 
what is lived. M there is to be perception of objects in the 
world, it is necessary that from the time of our very up- 
surge we should be in the presence of the world and of ob- 
jects. Sensation, a hybrid notion between the subjective and 
the objective, conceived from the standpoint of the object 
and applied subsequently to the subject, a bastard existence 
concerning which we can not say whether it exists in fact 
or in theory — sensation is a pure daydream of the psycholo- 
gist. It must be deliberately rejected by any 'serious theory 
concerning the relations between consciousness and the 
world. 

But if sensation is only a word, what becomes of the 
senses? No doubt one will recognize that we never in our- 
selves encounter that phantom and strictly subjective impres- 
sion which is sensation. One will admit that I apprehend only 
the green of this notebook, of this foliage and never the sensa- 
tion of green nor even the “quasi-green” which Husserl posits 
as the hyletic material which the intention animates into 
green-as-object. One will declare that he is easily convinced 
of the fact that on the supposition that the phenomenological 
reduction is possible — which remains to be proved — it will 
put us face to face with objects put within brackets as the 
pure correlates of .positional acts but not of impressional 
residues. Nonetheless it is still true that the senses remain. 
/ see the green, touch this cold, polished marble. An acci- 
dent can deprive me of a whole sense; I can lose my sight, 
become deaf, etc. What then is a sense which does not give us 
sensation? 

The answer is easy. Let us establish first that senses are 
ever^here and yet everywhere inapprehensible. This inkwell 
on the table is given to me immediately in the form of a thing 
and yet it is given to me by sight. This means that its pres- 



THE BODY 


417 


ence is a visible presence and that I am conscious that it is 
present to me as visible — ^that is, I am conscious (of) seeing 
it. But at the same time that sight is knowledge of the ink- 
well, sight slips away from all knowledge; there is no 
knowledge of sight. Even reflection will not give us this 
knowledge. My reflective consciousness will give to me in- 
deed a knowledge of my reflected-on consciousness of the 
inkwell but not that of a sensory activity. It is in this sense 
that we must take the famous statement of Auguste Comte: 
“The eye can not see itself.” It would be admissible, in- 
deed, that another organic structure, a contingent arrange- 
ment of our visual apparatus would enable a third eye to 
see our two eyes while they were seeing. Can I not see and 
touch my hand while it is touching? But then I shall be 
assuming the point of view of the Other with regard to my 
senses. I should be seeing eyes-as-objects; I can not see the eye 
seeing; 1 can not touch my hand as it is touching. Thus any 
sense in so far as it is-for-me is an inapprehensible; it is not 
the infinite collection of my sensations since I never encounter 
anything but objects in the world. On the other hand if I 
assume a reflective point of view on my consciousness, I shall 
encounter my consciousness of this or that thing-in-the-world, 
not my visual or tactile sense; finally if I can see or touch my 
sense organs, I have the revelation of pure objects in the 
world, not of a revealing or constructive activity. Nevertheless 
the senses are there. There is sight, touch, hearing. 

On the other hand, if I consider the system of seen objects 
which appear to me, I establish that they are not presented to 
me in just any order; they are oriented. Therefore since a 
sense can not be defined either by an apprehensible act or by 
a succession of lived states, it remains for us to attempt to de- 
fine it by its objects. If sight is not the sum of visual sensa- 
tions, can it not be the system of seen objects? In this case it 
is necessary to return to that idea of orientation which we in- 
dicated earlier and to attempt to grasp its significance. 

In the fihst place let us note that orientation is a constitu- 
tive structure of the thing. The object appears on the ground 
of the world and manifests itself in a relation of exteriority 
with other “thises” which have just appeared. Thus its revela- 
tion implies the complementary constitution of an xmdifferen- 
tiated ground which is the total perceptive field or the world. 
The formal structure of this relation of the figure to the 
ground is therefore necessary. In a word, the existence of a 



418 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


visual or tactile or auditory field is a necessity; silence, for ex- 
ample, is the resonant field of undifferentiated noises in which 
the particular sound on which we focused is swallowed up. 
But the material connection of a particular “this” to the 
ground is both chosen and given. It is chosen in so far as the 
upsurge of the for-itself is an explicit and internal negation of 
a particular “this” on the ground of the world: I look at the 
cup or the inkwell. It is given in the sense that my choice op- 
erates in terms of an original distribution of the thises which 
manifests the very facticity of my upsurge. It is necessary that 
the book appear to me on the right or on the left side of the 
table. But it is contingent that the book appears to me specif- 
ically on the left, and finally I am free to look at the book on 
the table or at the table supporting the book. It is this con- 
tingency between the necessity and the freedom of my choice 
that we call sense. It means that an object must always appear 
to me all at once — it is the cube, the inkwell, the cup which 
I see but that this appearance always takes place in a partic-- 
ular perspective which expresses its relations to the ground of 
the world and to other thises. It is always the note of the vio- 
lin which I hear. But it is necessary that I hear it through 
a door or by the open window or in a concert hall. Otherwise 
the object would no longer be in the midst of the world and 

would no longer be manifested to an existent-rising-up-in-the- 
world. 


On the other hand while it is very true that all the thises 
can not appear at once on the ground of the world and that 
the appearance of certain among them results in the fusion 
of certain others with the ground, while it is true that each 
tlm can manifest itself only in one way at a time although 
there exists for it an infinity of ways of appearing, stUl 
ese rules of appearance should not be considered as sub- 
jec ive and psychological. They are strictly objective and de- 
nature of things. If the inkwell hides a portion 
o the table from me, this does not stem from the nature of 
my sense but from the nature of the inkwell and of light. If 
e. o ject gets smaller when moving away, we must not ex- 
^ some kind of illusion in the observer but by the 
strictly external laws of perspective. Thus by these objective 
s a strictly objective center of reference is defined. 

^ perspective scheme the eye is the point 

percentivT^fi^H ^ f objective lines converge. Thus the 
P ptive field refers to a center objectively defined by that 



THE BODY 


419 


reference and located in the very field which is oriented 
around it. Only we do not see this center as the structure 
of the perceptive field considered; we are the center. Thus 
the order of the objects in the world perpetually refers 
to us the image of an object which on principle can 
not be an object for us since it is what we have to be. The 
structure of the world demands that we can not see without 
being visible. The intra-mundane references can be made only 
to objects in the world, and the seen world perpetually defines 
a visible object to which its perspectives and its arrange- 
ments refer. This object appears in the midst of the world and 
at the same time as the world. It is always given as an addi- 
tion to some grouping of objects since it is defined by the 
orientation of these objects; without it there would be no 
orientation since all orientations would be equivalent. It is the 
contingent upsurge of one orientation among the infinite 
possibilities of orienting the world; it is this orientation raised 
to the absolute. But on this level this object exists for us only 
in the capacity of an abstract indication; it is what everything 
indicates to me and what on principle I can not apprehend 
since it is what I am. In fact what I am can not on principle 
be an object for me inasmuch as I am it. The object which 
the things of the world indicate and which they include in 
their radius is for itself and on principle a non-object. 
But the upsurge of my being, by unfolding distances in 
terms of a center, by the very act of this unfolding deter- 
mines an object which is itself in so far as it causes itself 
to be indicated by the world; and I could have no intuition 
of it as object because I am it, I who am presence to myself 
as the being which is its own nothingness. Thus my being-in- 
the-world, by the sole fact that it realizes a world, causes itself 
to be indicated to itself as a being-in-the-midst-of-the-world 
by the world which it realizes. The case could not be other- 
wise, for my being has no other way of entering into contact 
with the world except to be in the world. It would be im- 
possible for me to realize a world in which I was not and 
which would be for me a pure object of a surveying contem- 
plation. But on the contrary it is necessary that I lose myself 
in the world in order for the world to exist and for me to be 
able to transcend it. Thus to say that I have entered into the 
world, “come to the world,” or that there is a world, or that 
I have a body is one and the same thing. In this sense my 
body is everywhere in the world; it is over there in the fact 



420 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


that the lamp-post hides the bush which grows along the 
path, as well m the fact that the roof up there is above the 
windows of the sixth floor or in the fact that a passing car 
swerves from right to left behind the truck or that the woman 
who is crossing the street appears smaller than the man who 
is sitting on the sidewalk in front of the cafe. My body is co- 
extensive with the world, spread across all things, and at the 
same time it is condensed into this single point which all 
things indicate and which I am, without being able to know it. 
This explanation should allow us to understand the meaning 
of the senses. 

A sense is not given before sensible objects. For is it not 
capable indeed of appearing as an object to the Other? 
Neither is it given after sensible objects; for in that case it 
would be necessary to suppose a world of incommunicable 
images, simple copies of reality the mechanism of whose ap- 
pearance was inconceivable. The senses are contemporaneous 
with objects; they are things “in person” as they are revealed 
to us in perspective. They represent simply an objective rule 
of this revelation. Thus sight does not produce visual sensa- 
tions; neither is it affected by light rays. It is the collection of 
all visible objects in so far as their objective and reciprocal 
relations all refer to certain chosen sizes — submitted to all at 
once — as measures, and to a certain center of perspective. 
From this point of view the senses must in no way be identi- 
fied with .subjectivity. In fact all variations which can be reg- 
istered in a perceptive field are objective variations. In partic- 
ular, the fact that one can cut off vision by “closing the eye- 
lids” is an external fact which does not refer to the subjectiv- 
ity of apperception. The eyelid, in fact, is merely one 
object perceived among other objects, an object which hides 
other objects from me as the result of its objective relation 
with them. No longer to see the objects in my room because I 
have closed my eyes is to see the curtain of my eyelids. In 
the same way if I put my gloves on the tablecloth, then no 
longer to see a particular design in the cloth is precisely 
to see the gloves. Similarly the accidents which affect a sense 
belong to the province of objects. “I see yellow” because I 
have jaundice or because I am wearing yellow glasses. In 
each case the reason for the phenomenon is not found in a 
subjective modification of the sense nor even in an organic 
change but in an objective relation between objects in the 
world; in each case I see “through” something, and the truth 



THE BODY 


421 


of my vision is objective. Finally if in one way or another 
the center of visual reference is destroyed (since destruction 
can come only from the development of the world according 
to its own laws — Le., expressing in a certain way my factic- 
ity), visible objects are not by the same stroke annihilated. 
They continue to exist for me, but they exist without any 
center of reference, as a visible totality without the appear- 
ance of any particular this; that is, they exist in the absolute 
reciprocity of their relations. Thus it is the upsurge of the 
for-itself in the world which by the same stroke causes the 
world to exist as the totality of things and causes senses to 
exist as the objective mode in which the qualities of things 
are presented. What is fundamental is my relation to the 
world, and this relation at once defines the world and the 
senses according to the point of view which is adopted. 
Blindness, Daltonism, myopia originally represent the way in 
which there is a word for me; that is, they define my visual 
sense in so far as this is the facticity of my upsurge. This is 
why I can know and objectively define my senses but only 
emptily, in terms of the world; all that is necessary is that my 
rational and universalizing thought should prolong in the 
abstract the indications which things give to myself about 
my sense and that it reconstitute the sense in terms of these 
signs as the historian reconstitutes an historical personality 
according to the evidence indicating it. But in Ais case I 
have reconstructed the world on the ground of pure rationali- 
ty by abstracting myself from the world Through thought. 
I survey the world without attaching myself to it; I place 
myself in an attitude of absolute objectivity, and each 
sense becomes one object among objects, a center of rel- 
ative reference and one which itself supposes coordi- 
nates. But thereby I establish in thought the absolute equiva- 
lence of all centers of reference. I destroy the world’s quality 
of being a world- -without my even being aware of it. Thus 
the world by perpetually indicating the senses which I am and 
by inviting me to recon.stitute it Impels me to eliminate the 
personal equation which I am by reinstating in the world the 
center of mundane reference in relation to which the world is 
arranged. But by the same stroke I escape — ^through abstract 
thought — ^from the senses which I am; that is, I cut my bonds 
With the world. I place myself in a state of simple surveying, 
and the world disappears in the absolute equivalence of its in- 
finite possible relations. The senses indeed are our being-in- 



422 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


the-world in so far as we have .to be it in the form of being- 
in-the-midst-of-the-world. 

These observations can be generalized; they can be applied 
in toto to my body inasmuch as it is the total center of refer- 
ence which things indicate. In particular our body is not 
only what has long been called “the seat of the five senses”; 
it is also the instrument and the end of our actions. It is im- 
possible to distinguish “sensation” from “action” even if we 
use the terms of classical psychology; this is v/hat we had in 
mind when we made the observation that reality is presented 
to us neither as a thing nor as an instrument but as an in- 
strumental-thing. This is why for our study of the body as a 
center of action we shall be able to take as a guiding thread 
the reasoning which has served us to reveal the true nature 
of the senses. 

As soon as v/e formulate the problem of action, we risk 
falling into a confusion with grave consequences. When I 
take this pen and plunge it into the inkwell I am acting. 
But if I look at Pierre who at that same instant is drawing 
up a chair to the table, I establish also that he is acting. 
Thus there is here a very distinct risk of committing the 
mistake which we denounced apropos of the senses; that is, 
of interpreting my action as it is-for-me in terms of the 
Other’s action. This is because the only action which I can 
know at the same time that it is taking place is the action 
of Pierre. I see his gesture and at the same time I determine 
his goal: he is drawing a chair up to the table in order to be 
able to sit down near the table and to write the letter which 
he told rne he wished to write. Thus I can apprehend all the 
intermediate positions of the chair and of the body which 
rnoves it as instrumental organizations; they are ways to ar- 
rive at one pursued end. The Other’s body appears .to me 
here as one instrument in the midst of other instruments, 
not only as a tool to make tools but also as a tool to manage 
tools, in a word as a tool-machine. If I interpret the role of 
body in relation to my action, in the light of the knowl- 
edge I have gained of the Other’s body, I shall then con- 
sider myself as disposing of a certain instrument which I can 
ispose of at my whim and which in turn will dispose of 

ot er instruments all functioning toward a certain end which 
I pursue. 

back to the classical distinction be- 
n e soul, and the body; the soul utilizes the tool which 



THE BODY 


423 


is the body. The parallel with the theory of sensation is per- 
fect. We have seen indeed that the latter started from the 
knowledge of the Other’s senses and that subsequently it 
endowed me with senses exactly similar to the sensible or- 
gans which I perceived in the Other. We have seen also the 
difficulty which such a theory immediately encountered; this 
is because I then perceive the world and particularly the 
Other’s sense organs through my own sense, a distorting or- 
gan, a refracting environment which can give me no infor- 
mation on its own affections. Thus the consequences of the 
theory ruin the objectivity of the very principle which has 
served to establish them. The theory of action, since it has 
an analogous structure, encounters analogous difficulties. In 
fact if I start with the Other’s body, I apprehend it as an in- 
strument and in so far as I myself make use of it as an in- 
strument. I can utilize it in order to arrive at ends which I 
could not attain alone; I command its acts through orders or 
supplications; I can also provoke its act by my own acts. At 
the same time I must take precautions with respect to a tool 
which is particularly delicate and dangerous to handle. In 
relation to it I stand in the complex attitude of the worker 
with respect to his tool-machine when simultaneously he di- 
rects its movements and avoids being caught by it. Once 
again in order to utilize the Other’s body to my best inter- 
ests I need an instrument which is my own body just as in 
order to perceive the Other’s sense oTgans I need other sense 
organs which are my own. Therefore if I conceive of my 
body in the image of the Other’s body, it is an instrument, 
in the world which I must handle delicately and which is 
like a key to the handling of other tools. But my relations 
with this privileged instrument can themselves be only tech- 
nical, and I need an instrument in order to handle this in- 
strument — ^which refers us to infinity. Thus if I conceive of 
my sense organs as like those of the Other, they require a 
sense organ in order to perceive them; and if I apprehend 
my body as an instrument like the Other’s body, it demands 
an instrument to manage it; and if we refuse to conceive of 
this appeal to infinity, then we must of necessity admit that 
paradox of a physical instrument handled by a soul, which, 
as we know, causes us to fall into inextricable aporias. 

Let us see whether we can attempt here as with the prob- 
leni of sensations to restore to the body its nature-for-us. 
Objects are revealed to us at the heart of a complex of in- 



424 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


strumentality in which they occupy a determined place. This 
place is not defined by pure spatial coordinates but in rela- 
tion to axes of practical reference. ‘T/ze gloss is on the cof- 
fee table”; this means that we must be careful not to upset 
the glass if we move the table. The package of tobacco is on 
the mantelpiece; this means that we must clear a distance of 
three yards if we want to go from the pipe to the tobacco 
while avoiding certain obstacles — end tables, footstools, etc, 
— ^which are placed between the mantelpiece and the table. 
In this sense perception is in no way to be distinguished 
from the practical organization of existents into a world. 
Each instrument refers to other instruments, to those which 
are its keys and to those for which it is the key. But these 
references could not be grasped by a purely contemplative 
consciousness. For such a consciousness the hammer would 
not refer to the nails but would be alongside them; further- 
more the expression “alongside” loses all meaning if it does 
not outline a path which goes from the hammer to the nail 
and which must be cleared. The space which is originally 
revealed to me is hodological space; it is furrowed with paths 
and highways; it is instrumental and it is the location of 
tools. Thus the world from the moment of the upsurge of 
my For-itself is revealed as the indication of acts to be per- 
formed; these acts refer to other acts, and those to others, 
and so on. It is to be noted however that if from this point 
of view perception and action are indistinguishable, action is 
nevertheless presented as a future efficacy which surpasses 
and transcends the pure and simple perceived. Since the per- 
ceived is that to which my For-itself is presence, it is re- 
vealed to me as co-presence; it is immediate contact, present 
adherence, it brushes lightly over me. But as such it is of- 
fered without my being able at present to grasp it. The thing 
perceived is full of promises; it touches me lightly in pass- 
ing, and each of the properties which it promises to reveal 
to me, each surrender silently consented to, each meaningful 
reference to other objects engages the future. 

Thus I am in the presence of things which are only prom- 
ises beyond an ineffable presence which I can not possess 
and which is the pure “being-there” of things; that is, the 
mine, ^ my facticity, my body. The cup is there on the sau- 
cer, it is presently given to me with its bottom side which 
A which everything indicates but which I do not see. 

nd if I wish to see the bottom side — i.e., to make it ex- _ 



THE BODY 


425 


plicit, to make it “appear-on-the-bottom-of-the-cup” — it is 
necessary for me to grasp the cup by the handle and turn it 

upside down. The bottom of the cup is at the end of my 

projects, and it amounts to the same thing whether I say that 
the other structures of the cup indicate it as an indispensable 
element of the cup or that they indicate it to me as the ac- 
tion which will best appropriate the cup for me with its 
meaning. Thus the world as the correlate of the possibilities 
which I am appears from the moment of my upsurge as the 
enormous skeletal outline of all my possible actions. Percep- 
tion is naturally surpassed toward action; better yet, it can be 
revealed only in and through projects of action. The world 

is revealed as an “always future hollow,” for we are always 

future to ourselves.^ 

Yet it must be noted that this future of the world which 
is thus revealed to us is strictly objective. The instrumental- 
things indicate other instruments or objective ways of mak- 
ing use of them: the nail is “to be pounded in” this way or 
that, the hammer is “to be held by the handle,” the cup is 
“to be picked up by its handle,” etc. All these properties 
of things are immediately revealed, and the Latin gerundives 
perfectly translate them. Of course they are correlates of non- 
thetic projects which we are, but they are revealed only as 
structures of the world: potentialities, absences, instrumental- 
ities. Thus the world appears to me as objectively articulated; 
it never refers to a creative subjectivity but to an infinity of 
instrumental complexes. 

Nevertheless while each instrument refers to another in- 
strument and this to another, all end Up by indicating an 
instrument which stands as the key for all. This center of 
reference is necessary, for otherwise all the instrumentalities 
would become equivalent and the world would vanish due 
to the total undifferentiation of gerundives. Carthage is “cfe- 
lenda” toT the Romans but “servanda” for the Carthagini- 
ans. Without relation to its centers Carthage is no longer 
anything; it falls into the indifference of the in-itself, for 
the two gerundives annihilate each other. Nevertheless we 
must of necessity see that the key is never given to me but 
only indicated by a sort of gap.^ What I objectively appre- 
hend in action is a world of instruments which encroach on 

^Tr. "Creux toujours Jutur." There is a suggestion here of a mold to 
be filled but, of course, with no idea of a determined future 

-Tr. Indiquie en creux; literally, "indicated -m a hollow (or mold)." 



426 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


one another, and each of them, as it is apprehended in the 
very act by which I adapt myself to it and surpass it, refers 
to another instrument which must enable me to utilize this 
one. In this sense the nail refers to the hammer and the 
hammer refers to the hand and the arm which utilizes it. 
But it is only to the extent that I cause the nails to be pound- 
ed in by the Other that the hand and the arm become in 
turn instruments which I utilize and which I surpass toward 
their potentiality. In this case the Other’s hand refers me to 
the instrument which wiU allow me to utilize this hand (to 
threats-promises-salary, etc.). The first term is present every- 
where but it is only indicated. I do not apprehend my hand 
in the act of writing but only the pen which is writing; this 
means^ that I use my pen in order to form letters but not my 
hand in order to hold the pen. I am not in relation to my 
hand in the same utilizing attitude as I am in relation to the 


pen; I am my hand. That is, my hand is the arresting of ref- 
erences and their ultimate end. The hand is only the utiliza- 
tion of the pen. In this sense the hand is at once the un- 
knowable and non-utilizable term which the last instrument 
of the series indicates (“book to be read — characters to be 
ormed on the paper — ^pen”) and at the same time the ori- 
entation of the entire series (the printed book itself refers 
back to the hand). But I can apprehend it — at least in so far 
as It IS acting only as the perpetual, evanescent reference 
o the whole series. Thus in a duel with swords or with 
quarter-staffs, it is the quarter-staff which I watch with my 
eyes and which I handle. In the act of writing it is the point 
o e pen which I look at in synthetic combination with 
u ^ square marked on the sheet of paper. But my 

7^°^jshed; it is lost in the complex system of in- 
^ order that this system may exist. It is simply 
the meaniqg and the orientation of the system. 

seems, we find ourselves before a double and con- 
necessity; since every instrument is utilizable and 

th! of another instrument, 

tool indefinite, objective reference from tool to 

can structure of the world implies that we 

beinp instrumentality only by 

beino ^ an instrument, that we can not act without 

comolf^y no other hand, an instrumental 

dinal mpan° ^ revoked only by the determination of a car- 
ing o this complex, and this determination is 



THE BODY 


427 


itself practical and active — ^to pound a nail, to sow seed. In 
this case the very existence of the complex immediately re- 
fers to a center. Thus this center is at once a tool objectively 
defined by the instrumental field which refers to it and at the 
same time the tool which we can not utilize since we should 
thus be referred to infinity. We do not use this instrument, 
for we are -it. It is given to us in no other way than by the 
instrumental order of the world, by hodological space, by 
the univocal or reciprocal relations of machines, but it can 
not be given to my action. I do not have to adapt myself to 
it nor to adapt another tool to it, but it is my very adapta- 
tion to tools, the adaptation which I am. 

This' is why if we reject the analogical reconstruction of 
my body according to the body of the Other, there remain 
two ways of apprehending the body: First, it is known and 
objectively defined in terms of the world but emptily; for 
this view it is enough that rationalizing thought reconstitute 
the instrument which I am from the standpoint of the in- 
dications which are given by the instruments which I uti- 
lize. In this case, however, the fundamental tool becomes a 
relative center of reference which itself supposes other tools 
to utilize it. By the same stroke the instrumentality of the 
world disappears, for in order to be revealed it needs a ref- 
erence to an absolute center of instrumentality; the world of 
action becomes the world acted upon of classical science; con- 
sciousness surveys a universe of exteriority and can no longer 
in any way enter into the world. Secondly the body is given 
concretely and fully as the very arrangement of things in so 
far as the For-itself surpasses it toward a new arrangement 
In this case the body is present in every action although in- 
visible, for the act reveals the hammer and the nails7 the 
brake and the change of speed, not the foot which brakes 
or the hand which hammers. The body is lived and not 
known. This explains why the famous “sensation of effort” 
by which Maine de Biran attempted to reply to Hume’s 
challenge is a psychological myth. We never have any sensa- 
tion of our effort, but neither do we have peripheral sensa- 
tions from the muscles, bones, tendons, or skin, which have 
been suggested to replace the sensation of effort. We per- 
ceive the resistance of things. What I perceive when I want 
to lift this glass to my mouth is not my effort but the heavi- 
ness of the glass — ^that is, its resistance to entering into an 
instrumental complex which I have made appear in the world. 



428 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

Bachelard rightly reproaches phenomenology for not 
sufficiently taking into accoimt what he calls the “coefficient 
of adversity” in objects.^ The accusation is just and applies 
to Heidegger’s transcendence as well as to Husserl’s intention- 
ality. But we must understand that the instrumentality is pri- 
mary: it is in relation to an original instrumental complex 
that things reveal their resistance and their adversity. The bolt 
is revealed as too big to be screwed into the nut, the pedestal 
too fragile to support the weight which I want to hold up, 
the stone too heavy to be lifted up to the top of the wall, etc. 
Other objects will appear as threatening to an instrumental 
complex already established — ^the storm and the hail threaten- 
ing to the harvest, the phylloxera to the vine, the fire to the 
house. Thus step by step and across the instrumental com- 
plexes already established, their threat will extend to the center 
of reference which all these instruments indicate, and in turn 
it will indicate this center through them. In this sense every 
means is simultaneously favorable and adverse but within the 
limits of the fundamental project realized by the upsurge of 
the For-itself in the world. Thus my body is indicated origi- 
nally by instrumental complexes and secondarily by destruc- 
tive devices. I live my body in danger as regards menacing 
machines as for manageable instruments. My body is every- 
where; the bomb which destroys my house also damages my 
body in so far as the house was already an indication of my 
body. This is why my body always extends across the tool 
which it utilizes: it is at the end of the cane on which I 
lean and against the earth; it is at the end of the telescope 
which shows me the stars; it is on the chair, in the whole 
house; for it is my adaptation to these tools. 

Thus at the end of this account sensation and action are 
rejoined and become one. We have given up the idea of 
first endowing ourselves with a body in order to study 
second the way in which we apprehend or modify the 
world through the body. Instead we have laid down as the 
foundation of the revelation of the body as such our original 
relation to the world — ^that is, our very upsurge into the midst 
of being. Far from the body being first for us and revealing 
things to us, it is the instrumental-things which in their origi- 
nal appearance indicate our body to us. The body is not a 
screen between things and ourselves; it manifests only the 
individuality and the contingency of our original relation to 

Bachelard, L’Eau et les Reves. Editions Jos6 Corti. 1942. 



THE BODY 


429 


instramental-things. In this sense we defined the senses and 
the sense organs in general as our being-in-the-world in so 
far as we have to be it in the form of being-in-the-midst-of 
the world. Similarly we can define action as our being-in-the- 
world in so far as we have to be it in the form of being-an- 
instrument-in-the-midst-of-the-world. But if I am in the 
midst of the world, this is because I have caused the world 
to-be-there by transcending being toward myself. And if I 
am an instrument in the world, this is because I have caused 
instruments in general to-be-there by the projection of myself 
toward my possibles. It is only in a world that there can be a 
body, and a primary relation is indispensable in order that 
this world may exist. In one sense the body is what I imme- 
diately am. In another sense I am separated from it by the in- 
finite density of the world; it is given to me by a reflux of the 
world toward my f acticity, and the condition of this reflux of 
the world toward my facticity is a perpetual surpassing. 

We are now able to define our body’s nature-for-us. The 
preceding observations have allowed us to conclude that the 
body is perpetually the surpassed. The body as a sensible cen- 
ter of reference is that beyond which I am in so far as I am 
immediately present to the glass or to the table or to the dis- 
tant tree ^hich I perceive. Perception, in fact, can be accom- 
plished only at the very place where the object is perceived 
and without distance. But at the same time it unfolds the dis- 
tances, and that in relation to which the perceived object in- 
dicates its distance as an absolute property of its being is the 
body. Similarly as an instrumental center of instrumental com- 
plexes the body can be only the surpassed; it is that which I 
surpass toward a new combination of complexes and which I 
shall perpetually have to surpass whatever may be the in- 
strumental combination at which I arrive; for every combina- 
tion from the moment that my surpassing fixes it in its being 
indicates the body as the center of reference f«r its own fixed 
immobility. Thus the body, since it is surpassed, is the Past. 
It is the immediate presence to the For-itself of “sensible” 
things in so far as this presence indicates a center of reference 
and is already surpassed either toward the appearance of a 
new this or toward a new combination of instrumental-things. 
ti each project of the For-itself, in each perception the body 
is there; it is the immediate Past in so far as it still touches 
on the Present which flees it. This means that it is at once a 



430 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


point of view and a point of departure — a point of view, a 
point of departure which I am and which at the same time I 
surpass toward what I have to be. 

This point of view which is perpetually surpassed and 
which is perpetually reborn at the heart of the surpassing, 
this point of departure which I do not cease to leave and 
which is myself rem ainin g behind me — ^this is the necessity 
of my contingency. It is doubly necessary. First it is neces- 
sary because it is the continual reapprehension of the For-itself 
by the In-itself and the ontolo^cal fact that the For-itself can 
be only as the being which is not its own foundation. To have 
a body is to be the foundation of one’s own nothingness and 
not to be the foimdation of one’s being; I am my body to the 
extent that I cm; I am not my body to the extent that I am 
not what I am. It is by my nihilation that I escape it But I do 
not thereby make an object of it, for what I am is what I 
perpetually escape. The body is necessary again as the obstacle 
to be surpassed in order to be in the world; that is, the 
obstacle which I am to myself. In this sense it is not different 
from the absolute order of the world, this order which I cause 
to arrive in being by surpassing it toward a being-to-come, 
toward being-beyond-being. We can clearly grasp the unity 
of these two necessities: being-for-itself is to surpass the 
world and to cause there to be a world by surpassing it. But 
to surpass the world is not to survey it but to be engaged in 
it in order to emerge from it; it is necessary always that a 
particular perspective of surpassing be effected. In this sense 
finitude is the necessary condition of the original project of 
the For-itself. The necessary condition for me to be what I 
am not and to not-be what I am — ^beyond a world which I 
cause to come into being — this condition is that at the heart 
of the infimte pursuit which I am there should be perpetually 
an inapprehensible given. This given which I am without 
having to be it — except in the mode of non-being — ^this I 
can neither grasp nor know, for it is everywhere recovered 
and surpasse^ utilized for my assumed projects. On the other 
hand eveiyihing indicates it to me, every transcendent outlines 
it in a sort of hollow by its very transcendence without my 
ever being able to turn back on that which it indicates 
smce I am the being indicated. In particular we must not 
understand the indicated-given as a pure center of reference 
of a static order of ihstrumental-things. On the contrary 
eir dynamic order, whether it depends on my action or not, 



THE BODY - 


431 


refers to it according to rules, and thereby the center of refer- 
ence is defined in its change as in its identity. The case could 
not be otherwise since it is by denying that I am being that I 
make the world come into being and since it is from the 
standpoint of my past — i.e., in projecting myself beyond my 
own being — ^that I can deny that I am this or that particular 
being. From this point of view the body — i.e., this inappre- 
hensible given — is a necessary condition of my action. In 
fact if the ends which I pursue could be attained by a purely 
arbitrary wish, if it were sufficient to hope in order to obtain, 
and if definite rules did not determine the use of instruments, 
I could never distinguish within me desire from will, nor 
dream from act, nor the possible from the real. No project of 
myself would be possible since it would be enough to conceive 
of it in order to realize it. Consequently my being-for-myself 
would be annihilated in the indistinction of present and 
future. A phenomenology of action would in fact show 
that the act supposes a break in continuity between the 
simple conception and the realization — ^that is, between 
a universal and abstract thought such as “A carburetor 
must not be clogged" and a technical and concrete thought 
directed upon this particular carburetor as it appe^s to me 
with its absolute dimensions and its absolute position. The 
condition of this technical thought, which is not distin- 
guished from the act which it directs, is my finitude, my 
contingency, finally my facticity. 

Now, to be exact, I am in fact in so far as I have a past, 
and this immediate past refers to the primary in-itself on the 
nihilation of which I arise through birth. Thus the body as 
facticity is the past as it refers originally to a birth; that is, to 
the primary nihilation which causes me to arise from the 
In-itself which I am in fact without having to be it. Birth, 
the past, contingency, the necessity of a point of view, the 
factual condition for all possible action of the world — such 
is the body, such it is for me. It is therefore in no way a con- 
tingent addition to my soul; on the contrary it is a per- 
manent structure of my being and the permanent condition of 
possibility for my consciousness as consciousness of the world 
and as a transcendent project toward my future. From this 
point of view we must recognize both that it is altogether 
contingent and absurd that I am a cripple, the son of a civil 
servant or of a laborer, irritable and lazy, and that it is never- 
theless necessary that I be that or else something else, French 



432 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


or German or English, etc,, a proletarian or bourgeois or aris- 
tocrat, etc., weak and sickly or vigorous, irritable or of amia- 
ble disposition — ^precisely because I can not survey the world 
without the world disappearing. My birth as it conditions 
the way in which objects are revealed to me (objects of luxury 
or of basic necessity are more or less accessible, certain social 
realities appear to me as forbidden, there are barriers and 
obstacles in my hodological space) ; my race as it is indicated 
by the Other’s attitude with regard to me (these attitudes are 
revealed as scornful or admiring, as trusting or distrusting); 
my class as it is disclosed by the revelation of the social 
conamunity to which I belong inasmuch as the places which I 
frequent refer to it; my nationality; my physiological struc- 
ture as instruments imply it by the very way in which they 
are revealed as resistant or docile and by their very coefficient 
of adversity; my character; my past, as everything which I 
have experienced is indicated as my point of view on the 
world by the world itself: all this in so far as I surpass it. in 
the syntihetic unity of my being-in-the-world is my body as 
the necessary condition of the existence of a world and as the 
contingent realization of this condition. 

Now at last we can grasp clearly the definition which we 
gave earlier of the body in its being-for-us: the body is the 
contingent form which is taken up by the necessity of my 
contingency. We can never apprehend this contingency as 
such in so far as our body is for us; for we are a choice, and 
for us, to be is to choose ourselves. Even this disability from 
which I suffer I have assumed by the very fact that I live; 
I surpass it toward my own projects, I make of it the neces- 
sary obstacle for my being, and I can not be crippled without 
choosing myself as crippled. This means that I choose the 
way in which I constitute my disability (as “unbearable,” 
“humiliating,” “to be hidden,” “to be revealed to all,” “an 
object of pride.” “the justification for my failures,” etc,'). But 
this inapprehensible body is. precisely the necessity that 
there be a choice, that I do not exist all at once. In this 
sense my finitude is the condition of my freedom, for there is 
no freedom without choice; and in the same way that die 
body conditions consciousness as pure consciousness of the 
world, it renders consciousness possible even in its very free- 
dom. 

. It remains for us to arrive at a conception of what the 
body is for me; for precisely because the body is inapprehen- 



THE BODY 


433 


sible, it does not belong to tlie objects in the world — i.e„ to 
those objects which I know and which I utilize. Yet on the 
other hand since I can be nothing without being the con- 
sciousness of what I am, the body must necessarily be in 
some way given to my consciousness. In one sense, to be sure, 
the body is’ what is indicated by all the instruments which 
I grasp, and I apprehend the body without knowing it in 
the very indications which I perceive on the instruments. 
But if we limit ourselves to this observation, we shall not be 
able to distinguish, for example, between the body and 
the telescope through which the astronomer looks at the 
planets. In fact ’if we define the body as a contingent point 
of view on the world, we must recognize that the notion of a 
point of view supposes a double relation: a relation with the 
things on which the body is a point of view and a rela- 
tion with the observer for whom the body is a point of 
view. When we are dealing with the body-as-a-point-of-view, 
this second relation is radically different from the first; it is 
not truly distinct when we are dealing with a point of view 
in the world (spectacles, a look-out point, a magnifying glass, 
etc,) which is an objective instrument distinct from the 
body. A traveler contemplating the landscape from a belve- 
dere sees the belvedere as well as the landscape; he sees the 
trees between the columns of the belvedere, the roof of the 
belvedere hides the sky from him, etc. Nevertheless the “dis- 
tance” between him and the belvedere is by definition less 
great than that between his eyes and the panorama. The 
point of view can approach the body to the point of almost 
being dissolved in it, as we see, for example, in the case of 
glasses, pince-nez, monocles, etc,, which become, so to speak, 
a supplementary sense organ. At its extreme limit — ^if we con- 
ceive of an absolute point of view — ^the distance between it 
and the one for whom it is a point of view is annihilated. This 
means that it would become impossible to withdraw in order 
to “give oneself plenty of room” and to constitute a new 
point of view on the point of view. It is precisely this fact, as 
we have seen, which characterizes the body. It is the instru- 
ment which I can not use in the way I use any other instru- 
ment, the point of view on which I can no longer take a 
point of view. This is why on the top of that hill which I 
call a “good viewpoint,” I take a point of view at the very in- 
stant when I look at the valley, and this point ^ of view on 
the point of view is my body. But I can not take a point of 



434 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

view on my body without a reference to infinity. Therefore 
the body can not be for me transcendent and known; the 
spontaneous, unreflective consciousness is no longer the con- 
sciousness of the body. It would be best to say, using “exist" 
as a transitive verb — that consciousness exists its body. Thus 
the relation between the body-as-point-of-view and things is 
an objective relation, and the relation of consciousness to the 
body is an existential relation, Wliat do we mean by an 
existential relation? 

First of all, it is evident tliat consciousness can exist its 
body only as consciousness. Therefore my body is a conscious 
structure of my consciousness. But precisely because the body 
is the point of view on which there can not be a point of 
view, there is on the level of the unreflective consciousness no 
consciousness of the body. The body belongs then to the 
structures of the non-thetic self-consciousness. Yet can we 
identify it purely and simply with this non-thetic conscious- 
ness? That is not possible either, for non-tlietic consciousness 
is self-consciousness as the free project toward a possibility 
which is its own; that is, in so far as it is the founda- 
tion of its own nothingness. Non-positional consciousness is 
consciousness (of the) body as being that which it surmounts 
and nihilates by making itself consciousness — i.e., as being 
something which consciousness is without having to be it 
and which it passes over in order to be what it had 
to be. In short, consciousness (of) the body is lateral and 
retrospective; the body is the neglected, the "passed by in 
silence" And yet the body is what this consciousness is; it is 
not even anything except body. Tlie rest is nothingness and 
silence. 

Consciousness of the body is comparable to the conscious- 
ness of a sign. The sign moreover is on the side of the body; 
it is one of the essential structures of the body. Now the con- 
sciousness of a sign exists, for otherwise we should not be able 
to understand its meaning. But the sign is that which is sur- 
passed toward meaning, that which is neglected for the sake 
of the meaning, that which is never apprehended for itself, 
that beyond which the look is perpetually directed. Con- 
sciousness (of) the body is a lateral and retrospective con- 
sciousness of what consciousness is without having to be it 
(r.e,, of its mapprehensible contingency, of that in terras of 
which consciousness makes itself a choice) and hence it is a 
non-thetic consciousness of the manner in which it is 



THE BODY 


435 


affected. Consciousness of the body is often confused with 
original aSectivity. Again it is very important to grasp the 
meaning of this ai[ectivity; and for this we must make a fur- 
ther distinction. Affectivity as introspection reveals it to us is 
in fact already a constituted affectivity; it is consciousness 
of the world. All hate is hate of someone; all anger is appre- 
hension of someone as hateful or unjust or faulty; to have 
sympathy for someone is to “find him sympathetic,” etc. In 
these various examples a transcendent “intention” is directed 
toward the world and apprehends it as such. Already therefore 
there is a surpassing, an internal negation; we are on the 
level of transcendence and choice. But Scheler has effectively 
demonstrated that this “intention” must be distinguished from 
pure affective qualities. For example, if I have a “headache” 
I can discover within me an intentional affectivity directed to- 
ward my pain so as to “suffer” it, to accept it with resigna- 
tion, or to reject it, to evd^uate it (as unjust, as deserved, as, 
purifying, as humiliating, etc.) so as to escape it. Here it is the 
very intention which is the affection; it is pure act and al- 
ready a project, a pure consciousness of something. This can 
not be what we should consider consciousness (of) the body. 

In reality this intention can not be the whole of affectivi- 
ty. Since affectivity is a surpassing, it presupposes a sur- 
passed. Moreover this is proved by the existence of what 
Baldwin incorrectly calls “emotional abstracts.” Baldwin has 
indeed established that we can realize affectively within us 
certain emotions without feeling them concretely. For ex- 
ample, if someone tells me of a particular painful event 
which has just darkened the life of Pierre, I shall exclaim, 
“How he must have suffered!” I do not know this suffer- 
ing and I do not actually feel it. These intermediaries be- 
tween pure knowledge and true affection Baldwin calls “ab- 
stracts.” But the mechanism: of such ap abstraction remains 
very obscure. Who abstracts? If following M. Laporte’s defini- 
tion we say that to abstract is to think of structures in isola- 
tion which can not exist separately, it is necessary either that 
we identify emotional abstracts with pure abstract concepts of 
emotions or else that we recognize that these abstracts can 
exist as such as real modalities of consciousness. In actuality 
these so-caUed “emotional abstracts” are empty intentions, 
pure projects of emotion. That is, we direct ourselves to- 
ward pain and shame, we strain toward them, consciousness 
transcends itself — but emptily. Grief is there, objective and 



436 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

transcendent, but it lacks concrete existence. It would be bet- 
ter to give for these insubstantial significations the name of 
affective images. Their importance of artisfic creation and 
psychological understanding is undeniable. But the important 
thing here is the fact that what separates them from real 
shame, for example, is the absence of the quality of being 
lived. 

There exist therefore pure affective qualities which are sur- 
passed and transcended by affective projects. We shall not 
make of them as Scheler did, some kind of “hyle” borne upon 
the flux of consciousness. For us it is simply -a matter of the 
way in which consciousness exists its contingency; it is the 
very texture of consciousness in so far as it surpasses this 
texture toward it own possibilities; it is the manner in which 
consciousness exists spontaneously and in the non-thetic 
mode, that which it constitutes thetically but implicitly as a 
point of view on the world. This can be pure grief, but it 
can also be a mood, an affective, non-thetic totality, the pure 
agreeable, the pure disagreeable. In a general way, it is what 
is called coenesthesia. This “coenesthesia” rarely appears 
without being surpassed toward the world by a transcendent 
project on the part of the For-itself; as such it can only with 
difficulty be studied in isolation. Yet there exist some privi- 
leged experiences in which it can be apprehended in its pu- 
rity, in particular what we call “physical” pain.- Therefore we 
shall now examine this experience in order to fix conceptually 
the structures of the consciousness (of) the body. 

My eyes are hurting but I should finish reading a philosoph- 
ical work this evening. I am reading. The object of my 
consciousness is the book and across the book the truths 
which it points out. The body is in no way apprehended for 
itself; it is a point of view ,and a point of departure. The 
words slip by one after the other before me; I make them 
slip by; those at the bottom of the page which I have not 
yet read still belong to a relative ground or “the-page-as- 
ground” which is organized upon the “book-as-ground” and 
on the absolute ground or ground of the world. But from the 
ground of their indistinction they are calling to me; they 
aheady possess the character of a friable totality; they are 
given as “to be made to slip by xmder my sight.” In all this 
the body is given only implicitly; the movement of my eyes 
belongs only to an observer’s glance. For myself I apprehend 
thetically only this fixed upsurge of the words one after the 



THE BODY 


437 


other. Yet the succession of the words in objective time is 
given and known through my own temporalization. Their 
motionless movement is given across a “movement” of my 
consciousness; and this “movement” of consciousness, a pure 
metaphor which designates a temporal progression, is for me 
exactly the movement of my eyes. It is impossible for me to 
distinguish the movement of my eyes from the synthetic pro- 
gression of my states of consciousness without resorting to 
the point of view of the Other. Yet at the very moment that 
I am reading my eyes hurt. Let us note first that this pain 
can itself be indicated by objects of the world; i.e., by the 
book which I read. It is with more difiSculty that the words 
are detached from, the undifferentiated ground which they 
constitute; they may tremble, quiver, their meaning may be 
derived only with effort, the sentences which I have just read 
twice, three times may be given as “not understood,” as “to 
be re-read.” But these same indications can be lacking — ^for 
example, in the case when my reading “absorbs me” and 
when I “forget” my pain (which does not mean that it has 
disappeared since if I happen to gain knowledge of it in a 
later reflective act, it will be given as having always been 
there) . In any case this is not what interests us; we are look- 
ing for the way in which consciousness its pain. But at 
the start someone will ask, how is the pain given as pain in 
the eyes? Is there not there an intentional reference to a tran- 
scendent object, to my body precisely in so far as it exists 
outside in the world? It is undeniable that pain contains in- 
formation about itself; it is impossible to confuse pain in 
the eyes with pain in the finger or the stomach. Neverthe- 
less pain is totally void of intentionality. It must be under- 
stood that if pain is given as pain “in the eyes,” there is no 
mysterious “local sign” there nor any knowledge either. Pain 
is precisely the eyes in so far as consciousness “exists them.” 
As such it is distinguished from other pain by its very cxis^ 
tence, not by a criterion nor by anything added on. To be 
sure, the expression pain in the eyes supposes a whole con- 
stitutive work which we shall have to describe. But at this 
stage in the argument, there is not as yet any reason to con- 
sider ^s, for it is not made. Pain is not considered from a 
reflective point of view; it is not referred back to a body-for- 
others. It is the-eyes-as-pain or vision-as-pain; it is not dis- 
tmguished from my way of apprehending transcendent words. 
We ourselves have called it pain in the eyes for the sake of 



438 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

clarity; but it is not named in consciousness, for it is not 
known. Pain in the eyes is distinguished from other possi- 
ble pains inexpressibly and by its very being. 

This pain however does not exist anywhere among the 
actual objects of the universe. It is not to the right or to the 
left of the book nor among the truths which are revealed 
through the book nor in my body-as-object (the body which 
the other sees and which I can always partially touch and 
partially see), nor in my body-as-a-point-of-view as the lat- 
ter is implicitly indicated by the world. Neither must we 
say that the pain is an “overprint” or that it is like a har- 
mony “superimposed” on the things which I see. Those are 
images which have no meaning. Pain then is not in space. 
But neither does it belong to objective time; it temporalizes 
itself, and it is in and through this temporalization that the 
time of the world can appear. What then is this pain? Sim- 
ply the translucent matter of consciousness, its being-there, . 
its attachment to the world, in short the peculiar contingency 
of the act of reading. The pain exists beyond all attention 
and all knowledge since it slips into each act of attention 
and of knowledge, since it is this very act in so far as the 
act is without being the foundation of its being. 

Yet even on this plane of pure being, pain as a contin- 
gent attachment to the world can be existed non-thetically by 
consciousness only if it is surpassed. Pain-consciousness is 
an internal negation of the world; but ’ at the same time it 
exists its pam — i.e., itself — as a wrenching nway from self. 
Pure pain as the simple “lived” can hot be reached; it be- 
longs to the category of indefinables -and indescribables which 
are what they are. But pain-consciousness is a project toward 
a further consciousness which would be empty of all pain; 
that is, to a consciousness whose contexture, whose being- 
^ere would be not painful.- This lateral escape, this wrench- 
ing away from self which characterizes pain-consciousness 
does not for all that constitute pain as a psychic object. It is 
a non-thetic project of the For-itself; we apprehend it only 
through the world. For example, it is given in the way in 
which the book appears as “about to be read in a hurried, 
jerl^ rhythm” where the words press against each other in 
an infernal, fixed round, where the whole universe is pierced 
with anxiety. In addition — and this is the unique character 
of-cpiporal existence — ^the inexpressible which one wishes to 
ee- IS rediscovered at the heart of this very wrenching away; 


THE BODY 


439 


it is this which is going to constitute the consciousnesses 
which surpass it; it is the very contingency and the being of 
the flight which wishes to flee it. Nowhere else shall we 
come closer to touching that nihilation of the In-itself by 
the For-itself and that apprehension of the For-itself by the 
-In-itself which nourishes the very nihilation. 

Granted, someone may say. But you are weighting the 
scales by choosing a case where pain is specifically pain in a 
functioning organ, pain in the eye while it is looking, in the 
hand while it is grasping. But I can suffer from a wound in 
my finger while I am reading. In this case it would be diffi- 
cult to maintain that my pain is the very contingency of my 
“act of reading.” 

Let us note first that no matter how absorbed I am in my 
reading, I do not for all that cease making the world come 
into being. Better yet, my reading is an act which implies in 
its very nature the existence of the world as' a necessary 
ground. This certainly does not mean that I have a weaker 
consciousness of the world but that I am conscious of it as 
a ground. I do not lose sight of the colors, the movements 
which surround me, I do not cease to hear sounds; they are 
simply lost in the undifferentiated totality which serves as 
the background for my reading. Correlatively my body does 
not cease to be indicated by the world as the total point of 
view on mundane totality, but it is the world as ground which 
indicates it. Thus my body does not cease to be existed in 
totality as it is the total contingency of my consciousness. 
It is what the totality of the world as ground indicates, and at 
the same tinSe it is the totality which I exist affectively in 
connection with the objective apprehension of the world. But 
to the extent that a particular this detaches itself as figure on 
the ground of the world, it correlatively points toward a 
functional specification of the corporal totality, and by the 
same stroke my consciousness exists a corporal form which 
arises on the body-as-totality which it exists. The book is 
read, and to the extent that I exist and that I surpass the con- 
tingency of vision — or if you prefer of reading — the eyes 
appear as figure on the ground of the corporal totality. On 
this plane of existence the eyes certainly are not the sensory 
organ seen by the Other but rather the very contexture of my 
consciousness of seeing inasmuch as this consciousness is a 
structure of my larger consciousness of the world. To be con- 
scious is always to be conscious of the world, and the world 



440 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

and body are always present to my consciousness although in 
different ways. But this total consciousness of the world is 
consciousness of the world as ground for a particular this; 
thus just as consciousness specifies itself in its very act of ni- 
hilation, there is the presence of a particular structure of the 
body on the total ground of corporeality. When I am in the 
process of reading, I do not cease to be a body seated in a 
particular armchair three yards from the window under 
given conditions of pressure and temperature. And I do not 
cease to exist this pain in my left index finger any more than 
I cease to exist my body in general. However I exist the pain 
in such a way that it disappears in the ground of corporeality 
as a structure subordinated to the corporal totality. The pain 
is neither absent nor unconscious; it simply forms a part of 
that distanceless existence of positional consciousness for it- 
self. If a little later I turn the pages of the book, the pain in 
my finger, without becoming thereby- an object of knowledge, 
will pass to the rank of existed contingency as a figure on a 
new organization of my body as the total groxmd of contin- 
gency. Moreover these statements are in agreement with 
the empirical observation that this is because it is easier when 
reading to “be distracted” from a pain in the finger or in the 
lower back than from pain in the eyes. For pain in the eyes 
is precisely my reading, and the words which I read refer 
me to it every instant, whereas the pain in my finger or back 
is the apprehension of the world as ground and hence is 
itself lost as a partial structure in the body as the fundamen- 
tal apprehension of the ground of the world. 

But now suppose that I suddenly cease to read and am at 
present absorbed in apprehending my pain. This means that 
I direct a reflective consciousness on my present conscious- 
ness-as-vision. Thus the actual texture of my consciousness 
reflected-on — in particular my pain — ^is apprehended and 
posited by my reflective consciousness. We inust recall here 
what we said concerning reflection: it is a total grasp with- 
out a point of view; it is a knowledge which overflows it- 
self and which tends to be objectivized, to project the known 
at a distance so as to be able to contemplate it and to think 
it The first movement of reflection is therefore to transcend 
the pure quality of consciousness in pain toward a pain-as- 
object Thus if we restrict ourselves to what we have called 
an accessory reflection, reflection tends to make of pain some- 
thing psychic. 



THE BODY 


441 


The psychic object apprehended throng pain is illness. 
This object has all the characteristics of pain, but it is tran- 
scendent and passive. It is a reality which has its own time, 
not the time of the external universe nor that of conscious- 
ness, but psyctdc time. The /psychic object can then support 
evaluations and various determinations. As such it is distinct 
even from consciousness and appears through it; it remains 
permanent while consciousness develops, and it is this very 
permanence which is the condition of the opacity and the 
passivity of illness. But on the other hand, this illness in 
so far as it is apprehended through consciousness has all 
the characteristics of unity, interiority, and spontaneity which 
consciousness possesses — ^but in degraded form. This degra- 
dation confers psychic individuality upon it. That is, first 
of all, the illness has an absolute cohesion without parts. 
In addition it has its own duration since it is outside con- 
sciousness and possesses a past and a future. But this 
duration, which is only the projection of the original tem- 
poralization, is a multiplicity of interpenetration. The ill- 
ness is “penetrating,” “caressing,” etc. And these charao 
teristics aim only at rendering the way in which this illness 
is outlined in duration; they are melodic qualities. A pain 
which is given in tvidnges followed by lulls is not appre- 
hended by reflection as the pure alteration of painful 
and non-painful consciousness. For organizing reflec- 
tion the brief respites are a part of the illness just as 
silences are a part of a melody. The ensemble constitutes the 
rhythm and the behavior of the illness. JBut at the same time 
that it is a passive object, illness as it is seen through an ab- 
solute spontaneity which is consciousness, is a projection of 
this spontaneity into the In-itself. As a passive spontaneity 
it is magical; it is ^ven as extending itself, as entirely the 
master of its temporal form. It appears and disappears dif- 
ferently than spatial-temporal objects. If I no longer see the 
table, this is because I have turned my head, but if I no long- 
er feel my illness, it is because it “has left.” In fact there 
is produced here a phenomenon analogous to that which psy- 
chologists of form call the stroboscopic illusion. The dis- 
appearance of the illness by frustrating the projects of the 
reflective for-itself is given as a movement of withdrawal, al- 



442 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


most as wHl. There is an animism of illness; it is given as a 
living thing which has its form, its own duration, its 
habits. The sick maintain a sort of intimacy with it. When it 
appears, it is not as a new phenomenon; it is, the sick man 
will say, “my afternoon crisis.” Thus reflection does not join 
together the moments of the same crisis, but passing over an 
entire day it links the crises together. Nevertheless this syn- 
thesis of recognition has a special character; it does not aim 
at constituting an object which would remain existing even 
when it would not be given to consciousness (in the manner 
of a hate which remains “dormant” or stays “in the uncon- 
scious”). In fact when the illness goes away it disappears for 
good. “Nothing is left of it” But the curious consequence 
follows that when the illness reappears, it rises up in its very 
passivity by a sort of spontaneous generation. For example, 
one can feel its “gentle overtures.” It is “coming back again.” 
“This is it.” Thus the first pains just like the rest are not ap- 
prehended for themselves as a simple, bare texture of the con- 
sciousness refiected-on; they are the “announcements” of the 
illness or rather the illness itself which is bom slowly — ^like 
a locomotive which gradually gets under way. On the other 
hand it is very necessary to understand that I constitute the 
illness with the pain. This does not mean that I apprehend 
the illness as the cause of the pain but rather that each con- 
crete pain is like a note in a melody: it is at once the whole 
melody and a “moment” in the melody. Across each pain 
I apprehend the entire illness and yet it transcends them all, 
for it is the synthetic totality of all the pains, the theme 
which is developed by them and through them. But the mat- 
ter of the illness does not resemble that of a. melody. In 
the first place it is something purely lived; there is no dis- 
tance between the consciousness reflected-on and the pain 
nor between the reflective consciousness and the consciousness 
reflected-on. The result is that the illness is transcendent but 
without distance. It is outside my consciousness as a syn- 
thetic totality and already close to being elsewhere. But 
on the other hand it is in my consciousness, it fastens on to 
consciousness with all its teeth, penetrates consciousness with 
all its notes; and these teeth, these notes are my consciousness. 

What has become of the body on this level? There has 
been, we noted, a sort of scission from the moment of the 
reflective projection; for the unreflective consciousness pain 
was the body; for the reflective consciousness the illness is 



THE BODY 


443 


distinct from the body, it has its own form, it comes and 
goes. On the reflective level where we are taking our posi- 
tion — ue., before the intervention of the for-others — ^the 
body is not explicitly and thematically given to consciousness. 
The reflective consciousness is consciousness of the illness. 
However while the illness has a form which is peculiar to it 
and a melodic rhythm which confers on it a transcending 
individuality, it adheres to the for-itself by means of its mat- 
ter since it is revealed through the pain and as the unity of 
all my pains of the same type. The illness is mine in this sense 
that I give to it its matter. I apprehend it as sustained and 
nourished by a certain passive environment in which the 
passivity is precisely the projection into the in-itself of the 
contingent facticity of the pains. It is my passivity. This pas- 
sive environment is not apprehended for itself except as the 
matter of the statue is apprehended when I perceive its form, 
and yet it is there. The illness feeds on this passivity and 
magically derives new strength from it just as Antaeus was 
nourished by the earth. It is my body on a new plane of 
existence; that is, as the pure noematic correlate of a reflective 
consciousness. We shall caU it a psychic body. It is not yet 
known in any way, for the reflection which seeks to appre- 
hend the pain-consciousness is not yet cognitive. This con- 
sciousness is affectivity in its original upsurge. It apprehends 
the illness as an object but as an affective object. One di- 
rects oneself first toward one’s pain so as to hate it, to 
endure it with patience, to apprehend it as unbearable, some- 
times to love it, to rejoice in it (if it foretells a release, a 
cure), to evaluate it in some way. Naturally it is the illness 
which is evaluated or rather which rises up as the necessary 
correlate of the evaluation. The illness is therefore not known; 
it is suffered, .BXid similarly the body is revealed by the illness 
and is likewise suffered by consciousness. In order to add 
cognitive structures to the body as it has been given to reflec- 
tion, we. win have to resort to the Other. We can not discuss 
this point at present, for it is necessary first to bring to light 
the structures of the body-for-others. 

_ At present, however, we can note that this psychic body, 
since it is the projection on the plane of the in-itself of the 
intra-contexture of consciousness, provides the implicit mat- 
ter df all the phenomena of tiie psyche. Just as the original 
body was existed by each consciousness as its own contingen- 
cy, so the psychic body is suffered as the contingency of hate 



444 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

or of love, of acts and qualities, but this contingency has a 
new character. In so far as it was existed by consciousness it 
was the recapture of consciousness by the in-itself; in so far 
as it is suffered by reflection in the illness or the hate or the 
enterprise, it is projected into the in-itself. Hence it repre- 
sents the tendency of each psychic object beyond its magical 
cohesion to be parcelled out in exteriority; it represents be- 
yond the magical relations which unite psychic objects to 
each other, the tendency of each one of them to be isolated 
in an insularity of indifference. It is therefore a sort of im- 
plicit space supporting the melodic duration of the psychic. 
In so far as the body is the contingent and indifferent mat- 
ter of all our psychic events, the body determines a psychic 
space. This space has neither high nor low, neither left 
nor right; it is without parts inasmuch as the magical co- 
hesion of the psychic comes to combat its tendency toward 
a division in indifference. This is nonetheless a real charac- 
teristic of the psyche — ^not that the psyche is united to a body 
but that under its melodic organization the body is its sub- 
stance and its perpetual condition of possibility. It is this 
which appears as soon as we name the psychic. It is this 
which is at the basis of the mechanistic and chemical meta- 
phors which we use to classify and to explain the events of 
the psyche. It is this which we aim at and which we form 
into images (image-making consciousnesses) which we pro- 
duce in order to aim at absent feelings and make them 
present. It is this, finally, which motivates and to some de- 
gree justifies psychological theories like that of the uncon- 
scious, problems like that of the preservation of memories. 

It goes without saying that we have chosen physical pain 
for the sake of an example and that there are thousands of 
other ways, themselves contingent, to exist our contingency. 
In particular we must note that when no pain, no specific 
satisfaction or dissatisfaction is “existed” by consciousness, 
Ihe for-itself does not thereby cease to project itself be- 
yond a contingency which is pure and so to speak unquali- 
fied. Consciousness does not cease “to have” a body. Coen- 
esthetic affectivity is then a pure, non-positional apprehen- 
sion of a contingency without color,' a pure apprehension of 
the self as a factual existence. This perpetual apprehension 
on the part of my for-itself of an insipid taste which I can 
not place, which accompanies me even in my efforts to get 
away from it, and which is my taste — this is what we have 



THE BODY 


445 


described elsewhere under the name of Nausea. A dull and 
inescapable nausea perpetually reveals my body to my con- 
sciousness. Sometimes we look for the pleasant or for physical 
pain to free ourselves from this nausea; but as soon as the 
pain and the pleasure are existed by consciousness, they in 
turn manifest its facticity and its contingency; and it is on 
the ground of this nausea that they are revealed. We must not 
take the term nausea as a metaphor derived from our phys- 
iological disgust. On the contrary, we must realize lhat it is 
on the foundation of this nausea that all concrete and em- 
pirical nauseas (nausea caused by spoiled meat, fresh blood, 
excrement, etc.) are produced and make us vomit. 

n. THE BODY-FOR-OTHERS 

We have just described the being of my body for~me. On 
this ontological plane my body is such as we have described 
it and it is only that. It would be useless to look there for 
traces of a physiological organ, of an anatomical and spatial 
constitution. Either it is the center of reference indicated 
emptily by the instrumental-objects of the world or else it is 
the contingency which the for-itself exists. More exactly, 
these two modes of being are complementary. But the body 
knows the same avatars as the for-itself; it has other planes 
of existence. It exists also for-others. We must now study 
it in this new ontological perspective. To study the way in 
which my body appears to the Other or the way in which 
the Other’s body appears to me amounts to the same thing. 
In fact we have established diat the structures of my being- 
for-the-Other are identical to those of the Other’s being-for- 
me. It is then in terms of the Other’s being-for-me that — 
for the sake of convenience — we shall establish the nature 
of the body-for-others (that is, of the Other’s body) . 

We showed in the preceding chapter that the body is not 
that which first manifests the Other to me. In fact if the 
fundamental relation of my being to that of the Other were 
reduced to the relation of my body to the Other’s body, it 
would be a purely external relation. But my connection with 
the Other is inconceivable if it is not an internal negation. 
I must apprehend the Other first as the one for whom I 
exist as an object; the reapprehension of ray selfness causes 
the Other to appear as an object in a second moment of pre- 



446 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

historic historization. The appearance of tlic Other’s body i 
not therefore the primary encounter; on the contrary, it i; 
only one episode in my relations with tlic Other and h 
particular in what we have described as making an objec! 
of the Otlier. Or if you prefer, the Otlier exists for me firs 
and I apprehend him in his body subsequently. Tlic Other’s 
body is for me a secondary structure. 

In the fundamental phenomenon of making an object oj 
the Other, he appears to me as a transcendence-transcended 
That is, by the mere fact that I project myself toward mj 
possibilities, I surpass and transcend the Other’s transcen- 
dence. It is put out of play; it is a transcendencc-as-object 3 
apprehend this transcendence in the world, and originally, 
as a certain arrangement of the instrumental-things of my 
world inasmuch as they indicate in addition a secondary cen- 
ter of reference which is in the midst of the world and 
which is not me. These indications — unlike the indications 
which indicate me — are not constitutive of the indicating 
thing; they are lateral properties of the object The Other, 
as we have seen, can not be a constitutive concept of the 
world. These indications all have therefore an original con- 
tingency and the character of an event. But the center of 
reference which they indicate is indeed the Other as a tran- 
scendence simply contemplated or transcended. The secondary 
arrangement of objects refers me to the Other as to the or- 
ganizer or to the beneficiary of this arrangement, in short 
to an instrument which disposes of instruments in view of 
an end which it itself produces. But in turn I surpass this 
end and utilize it; it is in the midst of the world and I can 
make use of it for my own ends. Thus the Other is at first 
indicated by things as an instrument. Things also indicate 
me too as an instrument, and I am a body precisely in so far 
as I make myself be indicated by things. Therefore it is the 
Other-as-body whom things indicate by their lateral and 
secondary arrangements. The fact is that I actually do not 
know instruments which do not refer secondarily to the 
Other's body 

^ Earlier we pointed out that I could not take any point of 
view on my body in so far as it was designated by things. 
The body is, in fact, the point of view on which I can take 
no point of view, the instrument which I can not utilize in 
the way I utilize any other instrument. When by means of 
universalizing thought I tried to think of my body emptily 



THE BODY 


447 


as a pure instrument in the midst of the world, the imme- 
diate result was the collapse of the world as such. On the 
other hand, because of the mere fact that 1 am not the Oth- 
er, his body appears to me originally as a point of view on 
which I can take a point of view, an instrument which I 
can utilize with other instruments. The Other’s body is in- 
dicated by the round of instrumental-things, but in turn it 
indicates other objects; finally it is integrated with my 
world, and it indicates my body. Thus the Other’s body is 
radically different from my body-for-me; it is the tool which 
I am not and which I utilize (or which resists me, which 
amounts to the same thing). It is presented to me originally 
with a certain objective coefficient of utility and of adversity. 
The Other’s body is therefore the Other himself as a tran- 
scendence-instrument. 

These same remarks apply to the Other’s body as the syn- 
thetic ensemble of sense organs. We do not discover in and 
through the Other’s body the possibility which the Other 
has of knowing us. This is revealed fundamentally in and 
through my being-as-object for the Other; that is, it is the 
essential structure of our original relation with the Other. 
And in this original relation the flight of my world toward 
the Other is equally given. By the reapprehension of my 
selfness I transcend the Other’s transcendence inasmuch as 
this transcendence is the permanent possibility of appre- 
hending myself as an object. Due to this fact it becomes a 
purely given transcendence surpassed toward my own goals, 
a transcendence which simply “is-there,” and the knowledge 
which the Other has of me and of the world becomes knowl- 
edge-as-amobject. This means that it is a given property of 
the Other, a property which in turn I can know. In truth 
this knowledge which I get of it remains empty in this sense 
ffiat I shall never know the act of knowing; this act, since 
It is pure transcendence, can be apprehended only by itself 
m the form of non-thetic consciousness or by the reflection 
issumg from it. What I know is only knowledge as being- 
there or. if you like, the being-there of knowledge. Thus 
this relativity of the sensory organ which is revealed to my 
universalizing reason but which can not be thought, so far 
as my own sense is concerned, without determining the col- 
lapse of the world — ^this I apprehend first when I apprehend 
the Other-as-object. I apprehend it without danger; for 
smce the Other forms part of my universe, his relativity 



448 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

can not determine the collapse of this universe. The senses 
of the Other are senses known as knowing. 

We can see here the explanation of the error of psychol- 
ogists who define my senses by the Other’s senses and who 
give to the sense organ as it is for me a relativity which be- 
longs to its being-for-others. We can see also how this er- 
ror becomes truth if we place it on its proper level of being 
after we have determined the true order of being and of 
knowmg. Thus the objects of my world indicate laterally 
an object-center-of-reference which is the Other. But this 
center in turn appears to me from a point-of-view-without 
a-point-of-view which is mine, which is my body or my 
contingency. In short, to employ an inaccurate but common 
expression, 1 know the Other through the senses. Just as 
the Other is the instrument which I utilize in the manner 
of the instrument which I am and which no instrument can - 
any longer utilize, so he is the ensemble of sense organs 
which are revealed to my sense knowledge; that is, he is a 
facticity which appears to a facticity. Thus there can be in 
its true place m the order of knowing and of being, a study 
of the Other’s sense organs as they are known through the 
senses by me. This study will attach the greatest importance 
to the function of these sense organs — which is to know* 
But this knowledge in turn will be a pure object for me; 
here, for example, belongs the false problem of “inverted 
vision.” In reality the sensory organ of the Other originally 
is in no way an instrument of knowledge for him; it is sim- 
ply the Other’s knowledge, his pure act of knowing in so 
far as this knowledge exists in the mode of an object in my 
universe. 

Nevertheless we have as yet defined the Other’s body 
only in so far as it is indicated laterally by the instrumental- 
tlmgs of my universe. Actually this by no means gives us 
his being-there in “flesh and blood.” To be sure, the Oth- 
er’s body is everywhere present in the very indication which 
instrumental-things give of it since they are revealed as 
utilized by him and as known by him. This room in which 
I wait for the master of the house reveals to me in its to- 
tality the body of its owner; this easy chair is a chair-where- 
he-sits, this desk is a desk-at-which-he-writes, this window 
is a window through which there enters the light-which- 
illuminates-the-objects-which-he-sees. Thus it is an outline 
omplete with all its parts, and this outline is an outline-of- 



THE BODY 


449 


an-object; an -object can come at every instant to fill the out- 
line with content. But still the master of the house “is not 
there.” He is elsewhere; he is absent. 

Now we have seen that absence is a structure of being- 
there. To be absent is to-be-elsewhere-in-my-world; it is to 
be already given for me. As soon as I receive a letter from 
my cousin in Africa, his being-elsewhere is concretely given 
to me by the very indications of this letter, and this being- 
elsewhere is a being-somewhere; it is already his body. We 
can in no other way explain why a mere letter from a be- 
loved woman sensually afl^ects her lover; all the body of the 
beloved is present as an absence in these lines and on this 
paper. But since the being-elsewhere is a being-there in 
relation to a concrete ensemble of instrumental-things in a 
concrete situation, it is already facticity and contingency. It 
is not only the encounter which I had yesterday with Pierre 
which de&es his contingency and mine; his absence yester- 
day similarly defined our contingencies and our facticities. 
And this facticity of the absent is implicitly given in these 
instrumental-things which indicate it; his abrupt appearance 
does not add anything. Thus the Other’s body is his facticity 
as an instrument and as a synthesis of sense organs as it is 
revealed to my facticity. It is given to me as soon as the 
Other exists for me m the world; the presence or absence of 
the Other changes nothing. 

But look! Now Pierre appears. He is entering my room. 
This appearance changes no thin g in the fundament^ struc- 
ture of my relation to him; it is contingency but so was his 
absence contingency. Objects indicate him to me: the door 
which he pushes indicates a human presence when it opens 
before him, the same with the chair when he sits down, etc. 

But the objects did not cease to indicate him during his 
absence. Of course I exist for him, he speaks to me. But I 
existed equally yesterday when he sent me that telegram, 
which is now on my table, to tell me of his coming. Yet 
there is something new. This is the fact that he appears at 
present on the ground of the world as a this which I can 
look at, apprehend, and utilize directly. What does this 
mean? First of all, the facticity of the Other — ^that is, the 
contingency of his being — ^is now explicit instead of being 
implicitly contained in the lateral indications of instrumental- 
things. This facticity is precisely what the Other exists — in 
and through his for-itself; it is what the Other perpetually 



450 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

lives in nausea as a non-positional apprehension of a con* 
tingency which he is, as a pure apprehension of self as a 
factual existence. In a word, it is his cocnesthesia, 'Hie 
Other’s appearance is the revelation of the taste of his being 
as an immediate existence. I, however, do not grasp this 
taste as he does. Nausea for him is not knowledge; it is the 
non-thetic apprehension of the contingency which he is. 
It is the surpassing of this contingency toward the unique 
possibilities of the for-itself. It is an existed contingency, 
a contingency submitted to and refused. It is this same con- 
tingency, and no other, which I presently grasp. But I am 
not this contingency. I surpass it toward my own possibili- 
ties, but this surpassing is the transcendence of an Other. 
It is given to me in entirety and without appeal; it is irre- 
mediable. The Other’s for-itself wrenches itself away from 
this contingency and perpetually surpasses it. But in so far 
as I transcend the Other’s transcendence, I fix it. It is no 
longer a resource against facticity; quite the contrary, it par- 
ticipates in turn in facticity, it emanates from facticity. Thus 
nothing comes to interpose itself between the Other’s pure 
contingency as a taste for himself and my consciousness. 
Indeed I apprehend this taste as it is existed. However, 
from the very fact of my otherness, this taste appears as a 
known and given this in the midst of the world. This body 
of the Other is given to me as the pure in-itself of his being 
— an in-itself among in-itselfs and one which I surpass to- 
ward my possibilities. This body of the Other is revealed 
therefore with two equally contingent characteristics: it is 
here and could be elsewhere; that is, instrumental-things 
could be arranged otherwise in relation to it, could indicate 
it otherwise; the distance between the chair and this body 
could be different; the body is like this and could be other- 
■^ise — i.e., I grasp its original contingency in the form of 
an objective and contingent configuration. But in reality, 
these two characteristics are only one. 'The second only makes 
the first present, only makes it explicit for me. 'This body of 
the Other is the pure fact of the Other’s presence in my 
world as a being-there which is expressed by a being-as-this. 
Thus the Other’s very existence as the Other-for-me implies 
that he is revealed as a tool possessing the property of know- 
ing and that this property of knowing is bound to some 
objective existence. This is what we shall call the necessity 
for the Other to be contingent for me. 



THE BODY 


451 


From the moment that there is an Other, it must be con- 
cluded that he is ^ instrument provided with certain sense 
organs. But these considerations only serve to show the ab- 
stract necessity for the Other to have a body. This body of the 
Other as I encounter it is the revelation as object-for-me of the 
contingent form assumed by the necessity of this contingency. 
Every Other must have sense organs but not necessarily 
these sense organs, not any particular face and finally not 
this face. But face, sense organs, presence — all that is 
nothing but the contingent form of the Other’s necessity to 
exist himself as belonging to a race, a class, an environment, 
etc., in so far as this contingent form is surpassed by a tran- 
scendence which does not have to exist it. What for the Other 
is his taste of himself becomes for me the Other*s flesh. The 
flesh is the pure contingency of presence. It is ordinarily hid- 
den by clothes, make-up, the cut of the hair or beard, the ex- 
pression, etc. But in the course of long acquaintance with a 
person there always comes an instant when all these disguises 
are thrown off and when I find myself in the presence of the 
pure contingency of his presence. In this case I achieve 
in the face or the other parts of a body the pure intuition of 
the flesh. This intuition is not only knowledge; it is the 
affective apprehension of an absolute contingency, and this 
apprehension is a particular type of nausea. 

The Other’s body is then the facticity of transcendence 
transcended as it refers to my facticity. I never apprehend 
the Other as body without at the same time in a non-explicit 
manner apprehending my body as the center of reference in- 
dicated by the Other. But all the same we can not perceive the 
Other’s body as flesh, as if it were an isolated object having 
purely external relations with other thises. That is true only 
for a corpse. The Other’s body as flesh is immediately given 
as the center of reference in a situation which is synthetically 
organized around it, and it is inseparable from this Situation.' 
Therefore we should not ask how the Other’s body can be 
first body for me and subsequently enter into a situation. The 
Other is originally given to me as a body in situation. There- 
fore there is not, for example, first a body and later action. 
But the body is the objective contingency of the Other’s aC' 
tion. Thus once again we find on another plane an ontolog- 
ical necessity which we pointed out in connection with the 
existence of my body for me: the contingency of the for- 
itself, we said, can be existed only in and through a tran- 



452 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

scendence; it is the rcapprchension — perpetually surpassed 
and perpetually rcapprehending — of the for-itself, the re- 
apprehension of the for-itself by the in-itself on the ground 
of the primary nihilation. Similarly here the Other’s body 
as flesh can not be inserted into a situation preliminarily 
defined. The Other’s body is precisely that in terms of 
which there is a situation. Here also it can exist only in 
and through a transcendence. Now, however, this tran- 
scendence is at the start transcended; it is itself an object 
Thus Pierre’s body is not first a hand which could subse- 
quently take hold of this glass; such a conception would tend 
to put the corpse at the origin of the living body. But his 
body is the complex hand-glass, since the flesh of the hand 
marks the original contingency of this complex. 

Far from the relation of the body to objects being a 
problem, we never apprehend the body outside this relation. 
Thus the Other’s body is meaningful Meaning is nothing 
other than a fixed movement of transcendence. A body is 
a body as this mass of flesh v/hich it is is defined by the 
table which the body looks at, the chair in v/hich it sits, 
the pavement on which it walks, etc. But to proceed fur- 
ther, there could be no question of exhausting the meanings 
which constitute the body — ^by means of reference to con- 
certed actions, to the rational utilization of instrumental-com- 
plexes. The body is the totality of meaningful relations to the 
world. In this sense it is defined also by reference to the air 
which it breathes, to the water which it drinks, to the food 
which it cats. The body in fact could not appear without sus- 
taining meaningful relations with the totality of what is. Like 
action, life is a transcended transcendence and a meaning. 
There is no difference in nature betv/cen action and life con- 
ceived as a totality. Life represents the ensemble of meanings 
which arc transcended toward objects which are not posit^ 
as thises on the ground of the world. Life is the Other’s 
body-as-ground in contrast to the body-as-figure inasmuch 
as this body-as-ground can be apprehended, not by the 
Other’s for-itself and as something implicit and non-posi- 
tional, but precisely, explicitly, and objectively by me. His 
body appears then as a meaningful figure on the ground 
of the universe but without ceasing to be a ground for the 
Other and precisely as a ground. But here we should make 
an important distinction*, the Other’s body actually appears 
to my body.” This means that there is a facticity in my 



THE BODY 


, . 453 

point of view on the Other. In this sense we must not con- , 
fuse my possibility of apprehending an organ (an arm, a 
hand) on the ground of the corporal totality and, on the other 
hand, my explicit apprehension of the Other’s body or of cer- 
tain structures of this body in so far as they are lived by the 
Other as the body-as-ground. It is only in the second case that 
we apprehend the Other as life. In the first instance it can 
happen that we apprehend as ground that which is figure for 
him. When I look at his hand, the rest of his body is 
united into ground. But it is perhaps his forehead or his 
thorax which for him exists non-thetically as figure on a 
ground in which his arms and his hands are dissolved. 

The result, of course, is that the being of the Other’s 
body is for me a synthetic totality. This means: (1) I can 
never apprehend the Other’s body except in terms of a total 
situation which indicates it. (2) I can not perceive any organ 
of the Other’s body in isolation, and I always cause each 
single organ to be indicated to me in terms of the totality of 
the flesh or of life. Thus my perception of the Other’s body 
is radically different from my perception of things. 

(1) The Other moves within limits which appear in im- 
mediate connection with his movements and which are the 
terms within which I cause the meaning of these movements 
to be indicated to myself. These limits are both spatial and 
temporal. Spatially it is the glass placed at a distance from 
Pierre which is the meaning of his actual gesture. Thus in my 
perception of the ensemble “table-glass-bottle, etc.,” I go to 
the movement of the arm in order to make known to myself 
what it is. If the arm is visible and if the glass is hidden, I 
perceive Pierre’s movement in terms of thfe pure idea of situa- 
tion and iu terms of the goal aimed at emptily beyond the 
objects which hide the glass from me, and this is the meaning 
of the gesture. 

Pierre’s gesture which is revealed to me in the present I 
always apprehend temporally from the standpoint of the fu- 
ture goals toward which he is reaching. Thus I make known 
to myself the present of the body by means of its future and 
still more generally, by means of the future of the world. We 
shall never be able to understand anything about the psy- 
chological problem of the perception of the Other’s body if 
we do not grasp, first this essential truth — that the Other’s 
body is perceived wholly differently than other bodies: for in 
order to perceive it we ^ways move to it from what is outside 



454 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

of it, in space and in time; we apprehend its gesture “against 
the current” by a sort of inversion of time and space. To 
perceive the Other is to make known to oneself what he is by 
means of the world. 

(2) I never perceive an arm raised alongside a motionless 
body. I perceive Pierre-who-raises-his-hand. This does not 
mean that by an act of judgmeilt I relate the movement of the 
hand to a “consciousness” which instigated it; rather I can 
apprehend the movement of the hand or of the arm only as a 
temporal structure of the whole body. Here it is the whole 
which determines the order and the movement of its parts. In 
order to prove that we are dealing here with an original per- 
ception of the Other’s body, we need only recall the horror 
we feel if we happen to see an arm which looks “as if it did 
not belong to any body,” or we may recall any one of those 
rapid perceptions in which we see, for example, a hand (the 
arm of which is hidden) crawl like a spider up the length 
of the doorway. In such cases there is a disintegration of the 
body, and this disintegration is apprehended as extraordinary. 
In addition, we know the positive proofs the Gestalt psy- 
chology has often advanced. It comes as a shock when a 
photograph registers an enormous enlargement of Pierre’s 
hands as he holds them forward (because the camera grasps 
them in their own dimension and without synthetic connec- 
tion with the corporal totality), for we' perceive that these 
same hands appear without enlargement if we look at them 
with the naked eye. In this sense the body appears within the 
limits of the situation as a synthetic totality of life and action. 

Following these observations, it is evident that Pierre’s 
body is in no way to be' distinguished from Pierre-for-me. The 
Other’s body wi^ its various meanings exists only for me: to 
be an object-for-others or to-be-a-body are two ontological 
modalities which are strictly equivalent expressions of the 
being-for-others on the part of the for-itself. Thus the mean- 
ings do not refer to a mysterious psychism; they are this 
psychism in so far as it is a transcendence-transcended. Of 
course there is a psychic cryptography; certain phenomena 
we “hidden.” But this certainly does not mean that the mean- 
ings refer to something “beyond the body.” They refer to 
the world and to themselves. In particular these emotional 
manifestations or, more generally, the phenomena erroneously 
called the phenomena of ' expression, by no means indicate to 
us a hidden affection lived by some psychism which would be 


THE BODY 


455 


the immaterial object of the research of the psychologist. 
These frowns, this redness, tliis stammering, this slight trem- 
bling of tlie hands, these downcast looks which seem at once 
timid and threatening — these do not express anger; they arc 
the anger. But this point must be clearly understood. In itself 
a clenched fist is nothing and means nothing. But also we 
never perceive a clenched fist. We perceive a man who in a 
certain situation clenches his fist. This meaningful act con- 
sidered in connection with the past and with possibles and 
understood in terms of the synthetic totality “body in situa- 
tion” is the anger. It refers to nothing other than to actions 
in tlie world (to strike, insult, etc.); that is, to new meaning- 
ful attitudes of the body. We can not get away from the fact 
that the “psychic object” is entirely released to perception 
and is inconceivable outside corporc^ structures. 

If this fact has not been taken into account Iiithcrto or if 
those who have supported it, like the Behaviorists, have not 
themselves very well understood what they wanted to say 
and have shocked the world with their pronouncements, tliis 
is because people too readily believe that all perceptions arc 
of the same kind. Actually perception must release to us 
immediately the spatial-temporal object Its fundamental 
structure is the internal negation, and it releases to me the 
object as it is, not as an empty image of some reality beyond 
reach. But precisely for this reason a new structure of percep- 
tion corresponds to each t>’pe of reality. Tlie body is the psy- 
chic object par excellence — the only psychic object. But if we 
consider that the body is a transcended transcendence, then 
the perception of it can not by nature be of the same type 
as that of inanimate objects. We must not understand by tliis 
that tlie perception is progressively enriched but that origi- 
nally it is of another structure. Thus it is not necessary to 
resort to habit or reason by analogy in order to explain 
how we understand expressive conduct, Tliis conduct is 
originally released to perception as understandable; its mean- 
ing is part of its being just as the color of the paper is part 
of the being of the paper. It is therefore no more necessary to 
refer to other conduct in order to understand a particular con- 
duct tlian to refer to the color of the table, or of another paper 
or of foliage in order to perceive tlie color of the folio 
which is placed before me.** 

* Tr. H Sartre did not intend to pun on Uic word? {fulUafc -nd fritS'.lf, 
then I apolorirc for my feeble ettempt with **foIia£c’* end ‘•/cho." 



456 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


The Other’s body, however, is given to xis immediately as 
what the Other is. In this sense we apprehend it as that 
which is perpetually surpassed toward an end by each par- 
ticular meaning. Take for example a man who is walking. 
From the start I understand this walking in terms of a spa- 
tial-temporal ensemble (alley-street-sidewalk-shops-cars, etc.) 
in which certain structures represent the meaning-to-come of 
the walking. I perceive this walking by going from the fu- 
ture to the present — although the future which is in ques- 
tion belongs to universal time and is a pure “now” 
which is not yet. The walking itself, a pure, inapprehensible, 
and nihilating becoming, is the present. But this present is 
a surpassing toward a future go^ on the part of something 
which is walking; beyond the pure and inapprehensible pres- 
ent of the movement of the arm we attempt to grasp the 
substratum of the movement. This substratum, which we 
never apprehend as it is except in the corpse, is yet always 
there as the surpassed, the past. When I speak of an arm- 
in-motion, I consider this arm which was at rest as the sub- 
stance of the motion. We pointed out in Part Two that such 
a conception can not be supported. What moves can not be 
the motionless arm; motion is a disorder of being. It is none- 
theless true that the psychic movement refers to two limits 
— ^the future terminus of its result, and the past terminus — 
the motionless organ which it alters and surpasses. I per- 
ceive the movement-of-the-arm as a perpetual, inapprehensi- 
ble reference toward a past-being. This past-being (the arm, 
the leg, the whole body at rest) I do not see at ^1; I can 
never catch sight of it except through the movement which 
surpasses it and to which I am a presence — ^just as one gets a 
glimpse of a pebble at the bottom of the stream through Ae 
movement of the water. Yet this immobility of being which 
is always surpassed and never realized, to which I perpetu- 
ally refer in order to say what is in motion — ^this is pure 
facticity, pure -flesh, the pure in-itself as the past of a 
transcended transcendence which is perpetually being made 
past. 

This pure in-itself, which exists only by virtue of being 
surpassed and in and through this surpassing, falls to the 
level of the corpse if it ceases to be simultaneously revealed 
and hidden by the transcendence-transcended. As a corpse—^ 
i.e., as the pure past of a life, as simply the remains — -it is 
still truly understandable orfy in terms of the surpassing 



THE BODY 


457 


which no longer surpasses it: it is that which has been sur- 
passed toward situations perpetually renewed. On the other 
hand, in so far as it appears at present as a pure in-itself, it 
exists in relation to other “thises” in the simple relation of 
indifferent exteriority: the corpse is no longer in situation. 
At the same time it collapses into itself in a multiplicity of 
sustaining beings, each maintaining purely external relations 
with the others. The study of exteriority, which always im- 
plies facticity since this exteriority is never perceptible ex- 
cept on the corpse, is anatomy, 'l^e synthetic reconstitution 
of the living person from the standpoint of corpses is physi- 
ology. From the outset physiology is condemned to under- 
stand nothing of life since it conceives life simply as a par- 
ticular modality of death, since it sees the infinite divisibility 
of the corpse as primary, and since it does not know the 
synthetic unity of the “surpassing towards” for which in- 
cite divisibility is the pure and simple past. Even the study 
of life in the living person, even vivisection, even the study of 
the life of protoplasm, even embryology or the study of the 
egg can not rediscover life; the organ which is observed 
is living but it is not established in the synthetic unity of 
a particular life; it is understood in terms of anatomy — 
i.e., in terms of death. There is therefore an enormous error 
in believing that the Other’s body, which is originally re- 
vealed to us, is the body of anatomical-physiology. The fault 
here is as serious as that of confusing our senses “for our- 
selves” with our sensory orgjins for others. The Other’s body 
is the facticity of the transcendence-transcended as this factic- 
ity is perpetually a birth; that is, as it refers to the indifferent 
exteriority of an in-itself perpetually surpassed. 

These considerations enable us to explain what is called 
character. It should be noted in fact that character has dis- 
tinct existence only in the capacity of an object of knowl- 
edge for the Other. Consciousness does not know its own 
character — unless in determining itself reflectively from the 
standpoint of another’s point of view. It exists its character 
in pure indistinction non-thematically and non-thetically 
in the proof which it effects of its own contingency and in 
the nihilation by which it recognizes and surpasses its fac- 
ticity. This is why pure introspective self-description does 
not give, us character. Proust’s hero “does not have” a di- 
rectly apprehensible character; he is presented first as being 
conscious of himself as an ensemble of general reactions 



458 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


common to all men (“mechanisms” of passion, emotions, a 
certain order of memories, etc.) in which each man can 
recognize himself. This is because these reactions belong to 
the general “nature” of the psychic. K (as Abraham attempt- 
ed in his book on Proust) we succeed in determining the 
character of Proust’s hero (for example, his weakness, his 
passivity, his particular way of linking love and money), 
this is because we are interpreting brute givens. We adopt 
an external point of view regarding them;, we compare them 
and we attempt to disengage from them permanent, objec- 
tive relations. But this necessitates detachment. So long as 
the reader using the usual optic process of reading identifies 
himself with the hero of the novel, the character of “Marcel” 
escapes him; better yet it does not exist on this level. It ap- 
pears only if I break the complicity which unites me to the 
writer, o^y if I consider the book no longer as a confidant 
but as a confidence, still better as a document. This charac- 
ter exists therefore only on the plane of the for-others, and 
that is the reason why the teachings and the descriptions of 
“psychological realists” (that is, those French authors who 
have undertaken an objective, social psychology) are never 
rediscovered in the lived experience of the subject. 

But if character is essentially for others, it can not be dis- 
tinguished from the body as we have described it. To sup- 
pose, for example, that temperament is the cause of charac- 
ter, that the “sanguine temperament” is the cause of irasci- 
bility is to posit character as a psychic entity presenting all 
the aspects of objectivity and yet subjective and suffered by 
the subject. Actually the Other’s irascibility is known from 
the outside and is from the start transcended by. my tran- 
scendence. In this sense it is not to be distinguished from the 
“sanguine temperament.” In both instances we apprehend 
the apoplectic redness, the same corporeal aspects, but we 
transcend these givens differently according to our projects. 
We shall be dealing with temperament if we consider this 
redness as the manifestation of the body-as-ground; that is, 
by cutting all that binds it to the situation. If we try to un- 
destand it in terms of the corpse, we shall be able to con- 
duct a physiological and medical study of it. If on the con- 
trary, we consider it by approaching it in terms of the global 
situation, it will be anger itself or again a promise of anger, 
or rather an anger in promise — that is, a permanent relation 
with instrumental-things, a potentiality. Between tempera- 



THE BODY 


459 


ment and character there is therefore only a difference of 
principle, and character is identical with the body. This is 
what justifies the attempts of numerous authors to instate a 
physiognomy as the basis of the studies of character and in 
particular the fine research of Kretschmer on character and 
the structure of the body. The character of the Other, in 
fact, is immediately given to intuition as a synthetic ensem- 
ble. This does not mean that we can immediately describe it 
It would take time to make the differentiated structures ap- 
pear, to make explicit certain givens which we have imme- 
diately apprehended affectively, to transform the global in- 
distinction which is the Other’s body into organized form. 
We can be deceived. It is permissible also to resort to gen- 
eral and discursive knowledge (laws empirically or statis- 
tically established in connection with other subjects) in or- 
der to interpret what we see. But in any case the problem 
will be only to make explicit and to organize the content of 
our first intuition in terms of foresight and action. This is 
without a doubt what is meant by people who insist that 
“first impressions are not mistaken.” In fact from the mo- 
ment of the first encounter the Other is given entirely and 
immediately without any veil or mystery. Here to learn is to 
understand, to develop, and to appreciate. 

Nevertheless as the Other is thus given, he is given in 
what he is. Character is not different from facticity — ^that 
is, from original contingency. We apprehend the Other as 
free, and we have demonstrated above that freedom is an 
objective quality of the Other as the unconditioned power 
of^ modifying situations. This power is not to be distin- 
guished from that which originally constitutes the Other and _ 
which is the power to make a situation exist in general. In 
fact, to be able to modify a situation is precisely to make a 
situation exist. The Other’s objective freedom is only tran- 
scendence-transcended; it is, as we have established, freedom- 
as-object In this sense the Other appears as the one who 
must be understood from the standpoint of a situation per- 
petually modified. This is why his body is always the past. 
In this sense the Other’s character is released to us as the 
surpassed. Even irascibility as the promise of anger is al- 
ways a surpassed promise. Thus character is given as the 
Other’s facticity as it is accessible to my intuition but also 
m so far as it is only in order to be surpassed. In this sense 
to “get angry” is already to surpass the irascibility by the 



460 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

very fact that one consents to it; it is to give irascibility a 
meaning. Anger will appear tlicrcforc as the recovery of iras- 
cibility by freedom-as-object. Tliis docs not mean that we are 
hereby referred to a subjectivity but only that what we tran- 
scend here is not only the Other’s facticity but his transcen- 
dence, not his being (f.c., his past) but his present and his 
future. Although the Other’s anger appears to me aUvays as a 
free-anger (which is evident by tlic very fact that I pass judg- 
ment on it) I can always transcend it — Lc., stir it up or 
calm it down; better yet it is by transcending it and only by 
transcending it Uiat I apprehend it Thus since the body is 
the facticity of the transcendence-transcended, it is always 
the body-which-points-beyond-itself; it is at once in space 
(it is the situation) and in time (it is frecdom-as-ob]ect). 
The body for-others is the magic object par excellence. Thus 
the Other’s body is always “a body-morc-than-body” because 
the Other is given to me totally and svithout intermediary 
in the perpetual surpassing of its facticity. But this surpass- 
ing does not refer me to a subjectivity; it is the objective 
fact that the bod}' — ^whetlicr it be as organism, as character, 
or as tool — never appears to me without surroundings, and 
that the body must be determined in terms of these sur- 
roundings, The Other’s body must not be confused with his 
objectivity. The Other’s objectivity is his transcendence as 
transcended. The body is the factidty of this transcendence. 
But the Other’s corporeality and objectivity arc strictly in- 
separable. 


m. THE THIRD ONTOLOGICAL 
DIMENSON OF THE BODY 

I exist my body: this is its first dimension of being. My body 
is utilized and knowm by the Other: this is its second di- 
mension. But in so far as / an: for others, the Other is re- 
vealed to me as the subject for whom I am an object. Even 
there the question, as we have seen, is of my fundamental 
relation with the Other. I exist therefore for myself as 
known by the Other — ^in particular in my very facticity. I 
e^st for myself as a body known by the Other. This is the 
third ontological dimension of my body. This is what we 
are going to study next; with it we shall have exhausted the 
question of the body’s modes of being. 



THE BODY 


461 


With tile appearance of the Other’s look I experience the 
revelation of my being-as-object; that is, of my transcendence 
as transcended. A me-as-object is revealed to me as an im- 
knowable being, as the flight into an Other which I am with 
full responsibility. But while I can not know or even con- 
ceive of this “Me” in its reality, at least I am not without 
apprehending certain of its formal structures. In particular 
I feel myself touched by the Other in my factual existence; 
it is my being-there-for-others for which I am responsible. 
This being-there is precisely the body. Thus the encounter 
with the Other does not only touch me in my transcendence: 
in and through the transcendence which the Other surpasses, 
the facticity which my transcendence nihilates and tran- 
scends exists for the Other; and to the extent that I am 
conscious of existing for the Other I apprehend my own fac- 
ticity, not only in its non-thetic nihilation, not only in the 
existent, but in its flight toward a being-in-the-midst-of-the- 
world. The shock of the encounter with the Other is for me 
a revelation in emptiness of the existence of my body outside 
as an in-itself for the Other. Thus my body is not given 
merely as that which is purely and simply lived; rather this 
“lived experience” becomes — ^in and through the contingent, 
absolute fact of the Other’s existence — extended outside in a 
dimension of flight which escapes me. My body’s depth of 
being is for me this peipetual “outside” of my most intimate 
“inside.” 

To the extent that the Other’s omnipresence is the funda- 
mental fact, the objectivity of my being-there is a constant 
dimension of my facticity; I exist my contingency in so far 
as I surpass it toward my possibles and in so far as it sur- 
reptitiously flees me toward an irremediable. My body is 
there not only as the point of view which I am but again as 
a point of view on which are actually brought to bear points 
of view which I could never take; my body escapes me on 
all sides. This means first that this ensemble of senses, 
which themselves can not be apprehended, is given as appre- 
hended elsewhere and by others. This apprehension which 
IS thus emptily manifested does not have the character of an 
ontological necessity; its existence can not be derived even 
from my facticity, but it is an evident and absolute fact. It 
has the character of a factual necessity. Since my facticity is 
pure contingency and is revealed to me non-thetically as a 
factual necessity, the being-for-others of this facticity comes 



462 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

to increase the contingency of this facticity, which is lost 
and flees from me in an infinity of contingency which es- 
capes me. Thus at the very moment when I live my senses 
as this inner point of view on which I can take no point of 
view, their being-for-others haunts me: they are. For the 
Other, my senses are as this table or as this tree is for me. 
They are in the midst of a world; they are in and through 
the absolute flow of my world toward the Other. Thus the 
relativity of my senses, which I can not think abstractly 
without destroying my world, is at the same time perpetual- 
ly made present to me through the Other’s existence; but it 
is a pure and inapprehensible appresentation. 

In the same way my body is for me the instrument which 
I am and which can not be utilized by any instrument. But 
to the extent that the Other in the original encounter tran- 
scends my being-there toward his possibilities, this instrument 
which I am is made-present to me as an instrument sub- 
merged in an infinite instrumental series, although I can in 
no way view this series by “surveying” it. My- body as alien- 
ated escapes me toward a being-a-tool-among-tools, toward 
a being-a-sense-organ-apprehended-by-sense-organs, and this 
is accompanied by an alienating destruction and a concrete 
collapse of my world which flows toward the Other and 
which the Other will reapprehend in his world. When, for 
example, a doctor listens to my breathing, I perceive his ear. 
To the extent that the objects of the world indicate me as an 
absolute center of reference, this perceived ear indicates cer- 
tain structures as forms which I exist on my body-as-a-ground. 
These structures — ^in the same upsurge with my being — ^be- 
long with the purely lived; they are that which I exist and 
wMch I nihilate. Thus we have here in the first place the 
original connection between designation and the lived. The 
things perceived designate that which I subjectively exist. 
But I apprehend-^n the collapse of the sense object “ear” 
— the doctor as listening to the sounds in my body, feeling 
my body with his body, and immediately the lived-desig- 
nated becomes designated as a thing outside my subjectivity, 
in the midst of a world which is not mine. My body is des- 
ignated as alienated. 

The experience of my alienation is made in and through 
affective structures such as, for example, shyness.^ To “feel 
oneself blushing,” to “feel oneself sweating,” etc., are in- 

®Tr. In French, tlmidlti, which carries also the idea of timidity. 



466 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

that pain “in the stomach” is the stomach itself as pain- 
fully lived. As such before the intervention of the alienating, 
cognitive stratum, the pain is neither a local sign nor 
identification. Gastralgia is the stomach present to con- 
sciousness as the pure quality of pain. As we have seen, the 
Illness as such is distinguished from all other pain and from 
any other illness — and by itself without an intellectual opera- 
tion of identification or of discrimination. At this level, how- 
ever, “the stomach” is an inexpressible; it can be neither 
named nor thought. It is only this suffered figure which is 
raised on the ground of the body-existed. Objectivating em- 
pirical knowledge, which presently surpasses the Illness 
suffered toward the stomach named, is the knowing of a cer- 
tain objective nature possessed by the stomach. I know that it 
has the shape of a bagpipe, that it is a sack, that it produces 
juices and enzymes, that it is enclosed by a muscular tunica 
with smooth fibres, etc. I can also know — because a' physi- 
cian has told me — that the stomach has an ulcer, and again I 
can more or less clearly picture the ulcer to myself. I can ■ 
imagine it as a redness, a slight internal putrescence; I can 
conceive of it by means of analogy with abscesses, fever blis- 
ters, pus, canker sores, etc. All this on principle stems .from 
bits of knowledge which I have acquired from Others or from 
such knowledge as Others have of me. In any case all this 
can constitute my Illness, not as I enjoy possession of it, but 
as it escapes me. The stomach and the ulcer become direc- 
tions of flight, perspectives of alienation from the object which 
I possess. 

At this point a new layer of existence appears: we have 
surpassed the lived pain toward the suffered iUness; now we 
surpass the illness toward the Disease.^ The Disease as psychic 
is of course very different from the disease known and de- 
scribed by the physician; it is a state. There is no question 
here of bacteria or of lesions in tissue, but of a synthetic form 
of destruction. This form on principle escapes me; at times it 
is revealed to the Other by the “twinges” of pain, by the 
“crises” of my Illness, but the rest of the time it remains out - - 
of reach without, disappearing. It is then objectively discem- 

® Tr. Sartre in. this and in the earlier related passage is contrasting three 
things— pain, illness, disease. "Pain” refers to the specific aches and twinges, 
“illn^s” to -the familiar recurrent pattern of these, “disease” to a 
totality which includes along with pain and illness the cause of them both' 
and which can be diagnosed and named by the physician. The French words 
are douleur, mat, and maladie. ^ . * 



THE BODY 


467 


ible for Others. Others have informed me of it, Others can 
diagnose it; it is present for Others even though I am not 
conscious of it. Its true nature is therefore a pure and simple 
being-for-others. When I am not suffering, I speak of it, I 
conduct myself with respect to it as with respect to an object 
which on principle is out of reach, for which others are the 
depositories. If I have hepatitis, I avoid drinking wine so as 
not to arouse pains in my liver. But my precise goal — ^not to 
arouse pains in my liver — is in no way distinct from that 
other goal — ^to obey the prohibitions of the physician who re- 
vealed the pain to me. Thus anotiaer is responsible for my 
disease. 

Yet. this object which comes to me through others pre- 
serves characteristics of a degraded spontaneity from the fact 
that I apprehend it through my Illness. It is not our intention 
to describe this new object nor to dwell on its, characteristics 
— ^its magical spontaneity, its destructive finality, its evil poten- 
tiality — on its familiarity with me, and on. its concrete rela- 
tions with my being (for it is before all else; my disease) . We 
wish only to point out that in the disease itself the body is a 
given: by the very fact that it was the support of the Illness, it 
is at present the substance of the disease, that which is de- 
stroyed by the disease, that across which this destructive form 
is extended. Thus the injured stomach is present through the 
gastralgia as the very matter out of which this gastralgia is 
made. The stomach is there; it is present to intuition and I 
apprehend it with its characteristics through the suffered pain. 

I grasp it as that which is gnawed at, as a “sack in the 
shape of a bagpipe,” etc. I do not see it, to be sure, but I 
know that it is my pain. Hence the phenomena which are in- 
correctly called “endoscopy.” In reality the pain itself tells 
me nothing about my stomach — contrary to what SoUier 
claims. But in and by means of the pain, my practical knowl- 
edge of it constitutes a stomach-for-others, which appears to 
me as a concrete and definite absence with exactly those ob- 
jective characteristics which I have been able to know in it. 
But on principle the object thus defined stands as the pole of 
alienation of my pam; it is, on principle, that which I am 
wthout having to be it and without being able to transcend 
it toward anything else. Thus in the same way that a being- 
for-others haimts myfacticity (which is non-thetically lived), 
so a being-an-object-for-others haunts — as a dimension of es- 
cape from my psychic body — ^the facticity constituted as a 



468 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


quasi-object for an accessory reflection. In the same way pure 
nausea can be surpassed toward a dimension of alienation; it 
will then present to me my body-for-others in its “shape,” its 
“bearing,” its “physiognomy”; it will be given then as disgust 
with my face, disgust with my too-white flesh, with my too- 
grim expression, etc. But we must reverse the terms. I am 
not disgusted by all this. Nausea is all this as non-thetically 
existed. My knowledge extends my nausea toward that 
which it is for others. For it is the Other who grasps my 
nausea, precisely as flesh and with the nauseous character of 
all flesh. 

We have not with these observations exhausted 'the de- 
scription of the appearances of my body. It remains to de- 
scribe what we shall call an aberrant type of appearance. In 
actuality I can see my hands, touch my back, smell the odor 
of my sweat. In this case my hand, for example, appears to 
me as one object among other objects. It is no longer indi- 
cated by the environment as a center of reference. It is or- 
ganized with the environment, and like it indicates my body 
as a center of reference. It forms a part of the world. In the 
same way my hand is no longer the instrument which I can 
not handle along with other instniments; on the contrary, it 
forms a part of the utensils which I discover in the midst 
of the world; I can utilize it by means of my other hand — 
for example, when I hold an almond or walnut in my left 
fet and then pound it with my right hand. My hand is then 
integrated with the infinite system of utensils-utilized. There 
is nothing in this new type of appearance which should 
disturb us or make us retract the preceding statements. 
Nevertheless this type of appearance must be mentioned. It 
can be easily explained on condition that we put it in its 
proper place in the order of the appearances of the body; that 
is, on condition that we examine it last and as a “curiosity” 
of our constitution. This appearance of my hand means simply 
that in certain well-defined cases we can adopt with regard 
to our own body the Other’s point of view or, if you like, that 
our own body can appear to us as the body of the Other. 
Scholars who have made this appearance serve as a basis for a 
general theory of the body have radically reversed the terms 
of the problem and have shown themselves up as understand- 
ing nothing about the question. We must realize that this 
possibility of seeing our body is a pure factual given, absolute- 
y contingent. It can be deduced neither from the necessity on 



THE BODY 


469 


the part of the for-itself “to have” a body nor from the factual 
structures of the body-for-others. One could easily conceive of 
bodies which could not take any view on themselves; it even 
appears that this is the case for certain insects which, although 
provided with a differentiated nervous system and with sense 
organs, can not employ this system and these organs to know 
each other. We are dealing therefore with a particularity of 
structure which we must mention without attempting to 
deduce it To have hands, to have hands which can touch 
each other — these are two facts which are on the same plane 
of contingency and which as such fall in the province of 
either pure anatomical description or metaphysics. We can 
not take them for the foundation of a study of corporeality. 

We must note in addition that this appearance of the 
body does not give us the body as it acts and perceives but 
only as it is acted on and perceived. In short, as we remarked 
at the beginning of this chapter, it would be possible to con- 
ceive of a system of visual organs such that it would allow 
one eye to see the other. But the seen eye would be seen as a 
thing, not as a being of reference. Similarly the hand which I 
grasp with my other hand is not apprehended as a hand which 
is grasping but as an apprehensible object. Thus the nature 
of our body for us entirely escapes us to the extent that we 
can take upon it the Other’s point of view. Moreover it must 
be noted that even if the arrangement of sense organs allows 
us to s6e the body as it appears to the Other, this appearance 
of the body as an instrumental-thing is very late in the 
child; it is in any case later than the consciousness (of) 
the body proper and of the world as a complex of instrumen- 
tality; it is later than the perception of the body of the Other. 
The child has known for a long tim e how to grasp, to draw 
toward himself, to push away, and to hold on to something 
before he first leams to pick up his hand and to look at it. 
Frequent observation has shown that the child of two months- 
does not see his hand as his hand. He looks at it, and if it is 
outside^ his visual field, he turns his head and seeks his hand 
With his eyes as if, it did not depend on him to bring the 
hand back within his sight It is by a series of psychological 
operations and of syntheses of identification and recognition 
mat the child will succeed in establishing tables of reference 
between the body-existed and the body-seen. Again it is neces- 
Aat the child begin the learning process with the 
Dther’s body. Thus the perception of my body is placed 



470 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


chronologically after the perception of the body of the Other. 

Considered at its proper place and time and in its original 
contingency, this appearance of the body does not seem to be 
capable of giving rise to new problems. The body is the in- 
strument which I am. It is my facticity of being “in-the- 
midst-of-the-world” in so far as I surpass this facticity toward 
my being-in-the-world. It is, of course, radically impossible 
for me to take a global point of view on this facticity, for 
then I should cease to be it. But why is it so astonishing that 
certain structures of my body, without ceasing to be a center 
of reference for the objects of the world, are ordered from a 
radically different point of view as compared with other ob- 
jects in such a way that along with the objects they point to 
one of my sense organs as a partial center of reference raising 
itself as a figure on the body-as-ground? That „my eye should 
see itself is by nature impossible. But why is it astonishing 
that my hand touches my eyes? If this seems surprising to us, 
it is because we have apprehended the necessity for the for- 
itself to arise as a concrete point of view on the world as if it 
were an ideal obligation strictly reducible to knowable rela- 
tions between objects and to simple rules. for the development 
of my achieved knowledge. But instead we ought to see here 
the necessity of a concrete and contingent existence in the 
midst of the world. 



CHAPTER THREE 


Concrete Relations with Others 


Up to this point we have described only our fundamental 
relation with the Other. This relation has enabled us to make 
explicit our body’s three dimensions of being. And since the 
original bond with the Other first arises in connection with 
the relation betweeen my body and the Other’s body, it 
seemed clear to us that the knowledge of the nature of the 
body was indispensable to any study of the particular rela- 
tions of my being with that of the Other. These particular 
relations, in fact, on both sides presuppose facticity; that is, 
our existence as body in the midst of the world. Not that 
the body is the instrument and the cause of my relations 
with others. But the body constitutes their, meaning and 
marks their limits. It is as body-in-situation that I apprehend 
the Other’s transcendence-transcended, and it is as body-in- 
situation that I experience myself in my alienation for the 
Other’s benefit. Now we can examine these concrete rela- 
tions since we are cognizant of what the body is. They are 
not simple specifications of the fundamental relation. Al- 
though each one of them includes within it the original re- 
lation with the Other as its essential structure and its foun- 
dation, &ey are entirely new modes of being on the part of 
the for-itself. In fact they represent the various attitudes of 
the for-itself in a world where there are Others. Therefore 
each relation in its own way presents the bilateral relation: 
for-itself-for-others, in-itself. If then we succeed in making 


471 



472 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

explicit the structures of our most primitive relations with 
the Other-in-the-world, we shall have completed our task. 
At the beginning of this work, we asked, “What are the re- 
lations of the for-itself with the in-itself?”^ We have learned 
now that our task is more complex. There is a relation of the 
for-itself with the in-itself in the presence of the Other. 
When we have described this concrete fact, we shall be in a 
position to form conclusions concerning the fundamental re- 
lations of the three modes of being, and we shall perhaps 
be able to attempt a metaphysical theory of being in general. 

The for-itself as the nMation of the in-itself tempo- 
ralizes- itself as a flight toward. Actually it surpasses its fac- 
ticity (i.e., to be either given or past or body) toward the 
in-itself wiiich it would be if it were able to be its own foun- 
dation. This may be translated into terms already psychologi- 
cal — and hence inaccurate although perhaps clearer — by say- 
ing that the for-itself attempts to escape its factual existence 
(i.e., its being there, as an in-itself for which it is in no 
way the foundation) and that this flight takes place toward 
an impossible future always pursued where the for-itself 
would be an in-itself-for-itself — i.e., an in-itself which would 
be to itself its own foundation. Thus the for-itself is both 
a flight and a pursuit; it flees the in-itself and at the same 
time pursues it. The for-itself is a pursued-pursuing. But 
in order to lessen the danger of a psychological interpre- 
tation of the preceding remarks, let us note that the for- 
itself is not first in order to attempt later to attain being; Jn 
short we must not conceive of it as an existent which would 
be provided with tendencies as this glass is provided with 
certain particular qualities. This pursuing flight is not a given 
which is added on to the being of the for-itself. The for-it- 
self is this veity flight. The flight is not to be distinguished 
from the ori^nal nitulation. To say that the for-itself is a 
pursued-pursuing, or that it is in the mode of having to be 
its being, or that it is not what it is and is what it is not — 
each of these statements is saying the same thing. The for- 
iteelf is not the in-itself and can not be it. But it is a rela- 
tion to the in-itself. It is even the sole relation possible to 
the in-itself. Cut off on every side by the in-itself, the for- 
itself can not escape it because the for-itself Ts nothing and 
it is separated froih the in-itself by nothing. The for-itself 
is the foundation of aU negativity and of aU relation. Ihe 
for-itself is relation. 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 473 

Such being the case, the upsurge of the Other touches the 
for-itself in its very heart. By the Other and for the Other 
the pursuing flight is fixed in in-itself. Already the in-itself 
.was progressively recapturing it; already it was at once a 
radical negation of fact, an absolute positing of value and 
yet wholly paralyzed \yith f acticity. But at least it was escap- 
ing by temporalization; at least its character as a totality de- 
totalized conferred on it a perpetual “elsewhere.” Now it is 
this very totality which the Other makes appear before him 
and which he transcends toward his own “elsewhere.” It is 
this totality which is totalized. For the Other I am irremedi- 
ably what I am, and my very freedom is a given characteris- 
tic of my being. Thus the in-itself recaptures me at the thresh- 
old of the future and fixes me wholly in my very flight, 
which becomes a flight foreseen and contemplated, a given 
flight. But this fixed flight is never the flight which I am for 
myself; it is fixed outside. The objectivity of my flight I 
experience as an alienation which I can neither transcend nor 
know. Yet by the sole fact that I experience it and that it 
confers on my flight that in-itself which it flees, I must turn 
back toward it and assume attitudes with respect to it. 

Such is the origin of my concrete relations with the Other; 
they are wholly governed by my attitudes with respect to the 
object which I am for the Other. And as the Other’s ex- 
istence reveals to me the being which I am without my being 
able either to appropriate that being or even to conceive it, 
this existence will motivate two opposed attitudes: First — 
The Other looks at me and as such he holds the secret of my 
being, he knows what I am. Thus the profound meaning 
of my being is outside of me, imprisoned in an absence. The 
Other has the advantage over me. Therefore in so far as I 
am fleeing the in-itself which I am without founding it, I 
can attempt to deny that being which is conferred on me 
from outside; that is, I can turn back upon the Other so as 
to make an object out of him in turn since the Other’s ob- 
ject-ness destroys my object-ness for him. But on the other 
hand, in so far as the Qther as freedom is the foundation of 
my being-in-itself, I can seek to recover that freedom and to 
possess it without removing from it its character as freedom. 
In fact if I could identify myself with that freedom which 
is the foundation of my being-in-itself, I should be to my- 
self my own foundation. To transcend the Other’s transcen- 
dence, or, on the contrary, to incorporate that transcendence 



474 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

within me without removing from it its character as tran- 
scendence — such are the two primitive attitudes which I as- 
sume confronting the Other. Here again we must understand 
the words exactly. It is not true that I first am and then later 
“seek” to make an object of the Other or to assimilate him; 
but to the extent that the upsurge of my being is an upsurge 
in the presence of the Other, to the extent that I am a pur- 
suing flight and a pursued-pursuing, I am — at the very root 
of my being — ^the project of assimilating and making an ob- 
ject of the Other. I am the proof of the Other. That is the- 
original fact. But this proof of the Other is in itself an atti- 
tude toward the Other; that is, I can not be in the presence 
of the Other without being that “in-the-presence” in the 
form of having to be it. Thus again we are describing the 
for-itself’s structures of being although the Other’s presence 
in the world is an absolute and self-evident fact, but a con- 
tingent fact — that is, a fact impossible to deduce from the 
ontological structures of the for-itself. 

These two attempts v/hich I am are opposed to one an- 
other. Each attempt is the death of the other; that is, the 
failure of the one motivates the adoption of the other. Thus 
there is no dialectic for my relations toward the Other but 
rather a circle — although each attempt is enriched by the 
failure of the other. Thus we shall study each one in turn. 
But it should be noted that at the very core of the one the 
other remains always present, precisely because neither of the 
two can be held without contradiction. Better yet, each of 
them is in the other and endangers the death of the other. 
Thus we can never get outside the circle. We must not for- 
get these facts as we approach the study of these funda- 
mental attitudes toward the Other. Since these attitudes are 
produced and destroyed in a circle, it is as arbitrary to begin 
with the one as with the other. Nevertheless since it is nec- 
essary to choose, we shall consider first the conduct in which 
the for-itself tries to assimilate the Other’s freedom. 


I FIRST ATTITUDE TOWARD OTHERS: 
LOVE, LANGUAGE, MASOCHISM 

Everything which may be said of me in my relations with 
the Other applies to him as well. While I attempt to free my- 
self from the hold of the Other, the Other is trying to free 



475 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

himself, from mine; while I seek to enslave the Other, ^e 
Other seeks to enslave me. We are by no means dealing 
with unilateral relations with an object-in-itself, but with 
reciprocal and moving relations. The following descriptions 
of concrete behavior must therefore be envisaged within the 
perspective of conflict. Conflict is the original meaning of 
being-for-others. 

If we start with the first revelation of the Other as a look, 
we must recognize that we experience our inapprehensible 
being-for-others in the form of a possession. I am possessed 
by the Other; the Other’s look fashions my body in its naked- 
ness, causes it to be bom, sculptures it, produces it as it is, 
sees it as I shall never see it. The Other holds a secret — ^the 
secret of what I am. He makes me be and thereby he possesses 
me, and this possession is nothing other than die conscious- 
ness of possessing me. I in the recognition of my object- 
state have proof that he has this consciousness. By virtue of - 
consciousness the Other is for me simultaneously the one 
who has stolen my being from me and the one who causes 
“there to be” a being which is my being. Thus I have a 
comprehension of this ontological structure: I am responsible 
for my being-for-others, but I am not the foundation of it 
It appears to me therefore m the form of a contingent given 
for which I am nevertheless responsible; the Other founds 
my being in so far as this being is in the form of the “there 
is.” But he is not responsible for my being although he 
founds it in complete freedom — in and by means of his free 
transcendence. Thus to the extent that I am revealed to my- 
self as responsible for my being, I lay claim to this being 
which I am; that is, I wish to recover it, or, more exactly, 

I am the project of the recovery of my being. I want to 
stretch out my hand and grab hold of this being which is 
presented to me as my being but at a distance — ^like the 
dmner of Tantalus; I want to found it by my very freedom. 
For if in one sense my being-as-object is an unbearable con- 
tingency and the pure “possession” of myself by another, 
still in another sense this being stands as the indication of 
what I should be obliged to recover and found in order to 
be the foundation of myself. But this is conceivable only if 
. ^similate the Other’s freedom. Thus my project of recover- 
is fundamentally a project of absorbing the Other. 

^ Nevertheless this project must leave the Other’s nature 
intact. Two consequences result: (1) I do not thereby cease 



476 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

to assert the Other— that is, to deny concerning myself that 
I am the Other. Since the Other is the foundation of my 
being, he could not be dissolved in me wi^out my being- 
for-others disappearing. Therefore if I project the realiza- 
tion of unity for the Other, this means that I project my 
assimilation of the Other’s Otherness as my own possibility. 
In fact the problem for me is to make myself be by acquir- 
ing the possibility of taking the Other’s point of view on 
myself. It is not a matter of acquiring a pure, abstract faculty 
of knowledge. It is not the pure category of the Other 
which I project appropriating to myself. This category is 
not conceived nor even conceivable. But on the occasion of 
concrete experience with the Other, an experience suffered 
and realized, it is this concrete Other as an absolute reality 
whom in his otherness I wish to incorporate into myself. 
(2) The Other whom I wish to assimilate is by no means 
the Other-as-object. Or, if you prefer, my project of incor- 
porating the Other in no way corresponds to a recapturing 
of my for-itself as myself and to a surpassing of the Other’s 
transcendence toward my own possibilities. For me it is not 
a question of obliterating my object-state by making an ob- 
ject of the Other, which would amount to releasing myself 
from my being-for-others. Quite the contrary, I want to as- 
similate the Other as the Other-looking-at-me, and this proj- 
ect of assimilation includes an augmented recognition of my 
being-looked-at. In short, in order to maintain before me 
the Other’s freedom which is looking at me, I identify my- 
self -totally with my being-looked-at And since my being-as- 
object is the only possible relation between me and the 
Odier, it is this being-as-object which alone can serve me as 
an instrument to effect my assimilation of the other freedom. 

Thus as a reaction to the failure of the third ekstasis, the 
for-itself wishes to be identified with the Other’s freedom 
as founding its own being-in-itself. To be other to oneself 
— ^the ideal always aimed at concretely in the form of being 
this Other to oneself — ^is the primary value of my relations 
with the Other. This means that my being-for-others is 
haunted by the indication of an absolute-being which would 
be itself as other and other as itself and which, by freely giv- 
ing to itself its being-itself as other and its being-other as 
itself, would be the very being of the ontological proof — 
that is, God. This ideal can not be realized without my sur- 
mounting the original contingency of my relations to the 


477 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

Other; that is, by overcoming the fact that there is no rela- 
tion of internal negativity between the negation by which 
the Other is made other than I and the negation by which 
I am made other than the Other. We have seen that this 
contingency is insurmountable; it is the fact of my relations 
with the Other, just as my body is the fact of my being-in- 
the-world. Unity with the Other is therefore in fact un- 
realizable. It is also unrealizable in theory, for the assimila- 
tion of the for-itself and the Other in a single transcendence 
would necessarily involve the disappearance of the character- 
istic of otherness in the Other. Thus the condition on which 
I project the identification of myself with the Other is that 
I persist in denying that I am the Other. Finally this project 
of unification is the source of conflict since while I experi- 
ence myself as an object for the Other, and while I project- 
assimilating him in and by means of this experience, the 
Other apprehends me as an object in the midst of the world 
and does not project identifying me with himself. It would 
therefore be necessary — since being-for-others includes a dou- 
ble mternal negation — ^to act upon the internal negation by 
which the Other transcends my transcendence and makes me 
exist for the Other; that is, to act upon the Other’s freedom. 

This unrealizable ideal which haunts my project of myself 
in the presence of the Other is not to be identified with love 
in so far as love is an enterprise; i.e., an organic ensemble 
of projects toward my own possibilities. But it is the ideal 
of love, its motivation and its end, its unique value. Love 
as the primitive relation to the Other is the ensemble of the 
projects by which I aim at realizing this value. 

These projects put me in direct connection with the Oth- 
er’s freedom. It is in this sense that love is a conflict. We 
have observed that the Other’s freedom is the foundation of 
my being. But precisely because I exist by means of the 
Other’s freedom, I have no security; I am in danger in this 
freedom. It moulds my being and makes me be, it confers 
values upon me and removes them from me; and my being 
receives from it a perpetual passive escape from self. Irre’ 
sponsible and beyond reach, this protean freedom in which 
myself can in turn engage me in a thousand 
different ways of being. My project of recovering my being 
can be realized only if I get hold of this freedom and reduce 
It to being a freedom subject to my freedom. At the same 
time it is the only way in which I can act on the free nega- 



478 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


tion of interiority by which the Other constitutes me as an 
Other; that is the only way in which I can prepare the way 
for a future identification of the Other with me. This will 
be clearer perhaps if we study the problem from a purely 
psychological aspect. Why does the lover want to be loved? 
If Love were in fact a pure desire for physical possession, it 
could in many cases be easily satisfied. Proust’s hero, for 
example, who installs his mistress in his home, who can see 
her and possess her at any hour of the day, who has been 
able to make her completely dependent on him economically, 
ought to be free from worry. Yet we know that he is, on the 
contrary, continually gnawed by anxiety. Through her con- 
sciousness Albertine escapes Marcel even when he is at her 
side, and that is why he knows relief only when he gazes on 
her while she sleeps. It is certain then that the lover wishes 
to capture a “consciousness.” But why does he wish it? And 
how? 

The notion of “ownership,” by which love is so often ex- 
plained, is not actually primary. Why should I want to ap- 
propriate the Other if it were not precisely that tbe Other 
makes me be? But this implies precisely a certain mode of 
appropriation; it is the Other’s freedom as such that we want 
to get hold of. Not because of a desire for power. The tyrant 
scorns love, he is content with fear. If he seeks to win the 
love of his subjects, it is for political reasons; and if he finds 
a more economical way to enslave- them, he adopts it imme- 
diately. On the other hand, the man who wants to be loved 
does not desire the enslavement of the beloved. He is not 
bent on becoming the object of passion which flows forth 
mechanically. He does not want to possess an automaton, 
and if we want to humiliate him, we need only try to per- 
suade him that the beloved’s passion is the result of a psy- 
chological determinism. The lover will then feel that both 
his love and his being are cheapened. If Tristan and Isolde 
fall madly in love because of a love potion, they are less in- 
teresting. The total enslavement of the beloved lolls the 
love of the lover. The end is surpassed; if the beloved is 
transformed into an automaton, the lover finds himself 
alone. Thus the lover does not desire to possess the beloved 
as one possesses a thing; he demands a special type of ap- 
propriation. He wants to possess a freedom as freedom. 

On the other hand, the lover can not be satisfied with 
that superior form of freedom which is a free and voluntary 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH .OTHERS 


479 


engagement. Who would be content with a love given as 
pure loyalty to a sworn oath? Who would be satisfied with 
the words, “I love you -because I have freely engaged my- 
self to love you and because I do not wish to go back on my 
word.” Thus the lover demands a pledge, yet is irritated by 
a pledge. He wants to be loved by a freedom but demands 
that this freedom as freedom should no longer be free. He 
wishes that the Other’s freedom should determine itself to 
become love — and this not only at the beginning of the af- 
fair but at each instant — and at the same time he wants this 
freedom to be captured by itself, to turn back upon itself, 
as in madness, as in a dream, so as to will its own captivity. 
This captivity must be a resignation that is both free and yet 
chained in our hands. In love it is not a determinism of the 
passions which we desire in the Other nor a freedom beyond 
reach; it is a freedom which plays the role of a determinism 
of the passions and which is caught in its own role. For him- 
self the lover does not demand that he be the cause of this 
radical modification of freedom but that he he the unique 
and privileged occasion of it In fact he could not want to 
be the cause of it without immediately submerging the be- 
loved in the midst of the world as a tool which can be tran- 
scended. That is not the essence of love. On the contrary, in 
Love the Lover wants to be “the whole World” for the be- 
loved. This means that he puts himself on the side of the 
world; he is the one who assumes and symbolizes the world; 
he is a this which includes all other thises. He is and con- 
sents to be an object. But on the other hand, he wants to 
be the object in which the Other’s freedom consents to lose 
itself, the object in which the Other consents to find his be- 
ing and his raison d’etre as his second facticity — the object- 
limit of transcendence, that toward which the Other’s tran- 
scendence transcends all other objects but which it can in no 
way transcend. And everywhere he desires the circle of the 
Other’s freedom; that is, at each instant as the Other’s free- 
dom accepts this limit to his transcendence, this acceptance is 
already present as the motivation of the acceptance consid- 
ered. It is in the capacity of an end already chosen that the 
lover wishes to be chosen as an end. This dlows us to grasp 
what basically the lover demands of the beloved; he does 
not want to act on the Other’s freedom but to exist a priori 
as the objective limit of this freedom; that is, to be given at 


480 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


one stroke along with it and in its very upsurge as the limit 
which the freedom must accept in order to be free. By this 
very fact, what he demands is a limiting, a gluing down of 
the Other’s freedom by itself; this limit of structure is in 
fact a given, and the very appearance of the given as the 
limit of freedom means that the freedom makes itself exist 
within the given by being its own prohibition against sur- 
passing it. This prohibition is envisaged by the lover simuU 
taneously as something lived — that is, something suffered 
(in a word, as a facticity) and as something freely consented 
to. It must be freely consented to since it must be effected 
only with the upsurge of a freedom which chooses itself as 
freedom. But it must be only what is lived since it must 
be an impossibility always present, a facticity which surges 
back to the heart of the Other’s freedom. This is expressed 
psychologically by the demand that the free decision to love 
me, which the beloved formerly has taken, must slip in as a 
magically determining motivation within his present free en- 
gagement. 

Now we can grasp the meaning of this demand: the 
facticity which is to be a factual limit for the Other in my de- 
mand to be loved and which is to result in being his own 
facticity — this is my facticity. It is in so far as I am the object 
which the Other makes come into being Aat I must be 
the inherent limit to his very transcendence. Thus the Other 
by his upsmrge into being makes me be as unsurpassable and 
absolute, not as a nihilating For-itself but as a being-for- 
others-in-the-midst-of-the-world. Thus to want to be loved is 
to invest the Other with one’s own facticity; it is to wish to 
compel him to re-create you perpetually as the condition of a 
freedom which submits itself and which is engaged; it is to 
wish both that freedom foimd fact and that fact have pre- 
eminence over freedom. If this end could be attained, it 
would result in the first place in my being secure within the 
Other’s consciousness. First because the motive of my un- 
easiness and ray shame is the fact that I apprehend and ex- 
perience myself in my being-for-others as that which can 
always be surpassed toward something else, that which is the 
pure object of a value judgment, a pure means, a pure tool. 
My uneasiness stems from the fact that I assume necessarily 
and freely that being which another makes me be in an ab- 
solute freedom. “God knows what I am for him! God knows 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


481 


wbat he thinks of me!” This means “God knows what he 
makes me be.” I am haunted by this being which I fear to 
encoimtef someday at the turn of a path, this being which 
is so strange to me and which is yet my being and which I 
know that I shall never encounter in spite of all my efforts to 
do so. But if the Other loves me then I become the unsur- 
passable, which means that I must be the absolute end. In this 
sense I am saved from instrumentality. My existence in the 
midst of the world becomes the exact correlate of my tran- 
scendence-for-myself since my independence is absolutely 
safeguarded. The object which the Other must make me be 
is an object-transcendence, an absolute center of reference 
arotmd which all the instrumental-things of the world are 
ordered as pure means. At the same time, as the absolute limit 
of freedom — i.e., of the absolute source of all values — am 
protected against any eventual devalorization. I am the ab- 
solute value. To the extent that I assume my being-for-others, 
I assume myself as value. Thus to want to be loved is to want 
to be placed beyond the whole system of values posited by the 
Other and to be the condition of all valorization and the ob- 
jective foundation of all values. This demand is the usual 
theme of lovers’ conversations, whether as in La Porte 
Etroite, the woman who wants to be loved identifies herself 
with an ascetic morality of self-surpassing and wishes to 
embody the ideal limit of this surpassing — or as more usually 
happens, the woman in love demands that the beloved in his 
acts should sacrifice traditional morality for her and is 
anxious to know whether the beloved would betray his friends 
for her, “would steal for her,” “would kill for her,” etc. 

From this point of view, my being must escape the look 
of the beloved, or rather it must be the object of a look with 
another structure. I must no longer be seen on the ground of 
the world as a "this” among other “thises,” but the world 
must be revealed in terms of me. In fact to the extent that 
the upsurge of freedom makes a world exist, I must be, as the 
limiting-condition of this upsurge, the very condition of the 
upsurge of a world. I must be the one whose function is to 
makes trees and water exist, to make cities and fields and 
other men exist, in order to give them later to the Other who 
arranges them into a world, just as the mother in matrilineal 
communities receives titles and the family name not to keep 
them herself but to transfer them immediately to her chil- 



482 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

dren. In one sense if I am to be loved, I am the object by 
whose agency the world will exist for the Other; in an- 
other sense I am the world. Instead of being a “this” detach- 
ing itself on the ground of the world, I am the ground-as*ob- 
ject on which the world detaches itself. Thus I am reassured; 
the Other’s look no longer paralyzes me with finitude. It no 
longer fixes my being in what I am. I, can no longer be 
looked at as ugly, as small, as cowardly, since these character- 
istics necessarily represent a factual limitation of my being 
and an apprehension of my finitude as finitude. To be sure, 
my possibles remain transcended possibilities, dead-possibil- 
ities; but I possess all possibles. I am all the dead-possibilities 
in the world; hence I cease to be the being who is understood 
from the standpoint of other beings or of its acts. In the 
loving intuition which I demand, I am to be given as an ab- 
solute totality in terms of which, all its peculiar acts and all 
beings are to be understood. One could say, slightly modify- 
ing a famous pronouncement of the Stoics, that “the beloved 
can fail in three ways.”^ The ideal of the sage and the ideal 
of the man who wants to be loved actually coincide in this 
that both want to be an object-as-totality accessible to a global 
intuition which will apprehend the beloved’s or the sage’s 
actions in the world as partial structures which are interpreted 
in terms of the totality. Just as wisdom is proposed as a state 
to be attained by an absolute metamorphosis, so the Other’s 
freedom must be absolutely metamorphosed in order to allow 
me to attain the state of being loved. 

Up to this point our description would fall into line 
with Hegel’s famous description of the Master and Slave re- 
lation. What the Hegelian Master is for the Slave, the lover 
wants to be for the beloved. But the analogy stops here, for 
with Hegel the Master demands the Slave’s freedom only later- 
ally and, so to speak, implicitly, while the lover wants the 
beloved’s freedom first and foremost. In this sense if I am 
to be loved by the Other, this means that I am to be freely 
chosen as beloved. As we know, in the current terminology 
of love, the beloved is often called the chosen one. But this 
choice must not be relative and contingent. The lover is 
irritated and feels himself cheapened when he thinks that the 
beloved has chosen him from among others. “Then if I had 
not come into a certain city, if I had not visited the home of 

iTr. Literally, “can tumble three times.” 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


483 


so and so, you would never have known me, you wouldn’t 
have loved me?” This thought grieves the lover; his love be- 
comes one love among others and is limited by the beloved’s 
facticity and by his own f acticity as well as by Ihe contingency 
of encounters. It becomes love in the world, an object which 
presupposes the world and which in turn can exist for others. 
What he is demanding he expresses by the awkward and 
vitiated phrases of “fatalism.” He says, “We were made for 
each other,” or again he uses the expression “soul mate.” But 
we must translate all this. The lover knows very well that 
“being made for each other” refers to an original choice. 
This choice can be God’s, since he is the being who is abso- 
lute choice, but God here represents only the farthest possible 
limit of the demand for an absolute. Actually what the lover 
demands is that the beloved should make of him an absolute 
choice. This means that the beloved’s being-in-the-world 
must be a being-as-loving. The upsurge of the beloved must 
be the beloved’s free choice of the lover. And since the 
Other is the foundation of my being-as-object, I demand of 
him that the free upsurge of Ms being should have Ms choice 
of me as his unique and absolute end; that is, that he should 
choose to be for the sake of founding my object-state and my 
facticity. 

Thus my facticity is saved. It is no longer this unthink- 
able and insurmountable given wMch I am fleeing; it is 
that for wMch the Other freely makes himself exist; it is as 
an end wMch he has given to himself. I have infected him 
with my facticity, but as it is in the form of freedom that 
he has been infected with it, he refers it back to me as a 
facticity taken up and consented to. He is the foundation of 
it in order that it may be his end. By means of tMs love I 
then have a different apprehension of my alienation and of 
my own facticity. My facticity — as for-others — is no longer 
a fact but a right. My existence is because it is given a name. 

I am because I give myself away. These beloved veins on my 
hands exist — beneficently. How good I am to have eyes, hair, 
eyebrows and to lavish them away tirelessly in an overflow of 
generosity to this tireless desire wMch the Other freely makes 
himself be. Whereas before being loved we were uneasy 
about that unjustified, unjustifiable protuberance wMch was 
pur existence, whereas we felt ourselves “de trop,” we now 
feel that our existence is taken up and willed even in its 



484 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

tiniest details by an absolute freedom which at the same time 
our existence conditions and which we ourselves will with 
our freedom. This is the basis for the joy of love when there 
is joy; we feel that our existence is justified. 

By the same token if the beloved can love us, he is wholly 
ready to be assimilated by our freedom; for this being-loved 
which we desire is already the ontological proof applied to our 
being-for-others. Our objective essence implies the existence 
of the Other, and conversely it is the Other’s freedom which 
founds our essence. If we could manage to interiorize the 
whole system, we should be our own foundation. 

Such then is the real goal of the lover in so far as his love 
is an enterprise — Le., a project of himself. This project is 
going to provoke a conflict The beloved in fact apprehends 
the lover as one Other-as-object among others; that is, he per- 
ceives the lover on the ground of the world, transcends him, 
and utilizes him. The beloved is a look. He can not therefore 
employ his transcendence to fix an ultimate limit to his sur- 
passings, nor can he employ his freedom to captivate itself.* 
The beloved can not will to love. Therefore the lover must 
seduce the beloved, and his love can in no way be dis- 
tinguished from the enterprise of seduction. In seduction I 
do not try to reveal my subjectivity to the Other. Moreover 
I could do so only by looking at the other; but by this look I 
should cause the Other’s subjectivity to disappear, and it is 
exactly this which I want to assimilate. To seduce is to risk 
assuming my object-state completely for the Other; it is to 
put myself beneath his look and to make him look at me; it 
is to risk the danger of being-seen in order to effect .a new 
departure and to appropriate the Other in and by means of my 
object-ness. I refuse to leave the level on which I make proof 
of my object-ness; it is on this level that I wish to engage in 
battle by making myself a fascinating object. In Part Two we 
defined fascination as a state. It is, we said, the non-thetic 
consciousness of being nothing in the presence of being. 
Seduction aims at producing in the Other the consciousness 
of his state of nothingness as he confronts the seductive ob- 
ject. By seduction I aim at constituting myself as a fullness 
of being and at making myself recognized as such. To accom- 
plish this I constitute myself as a meaningful object. My acts 
must point in two directions: On the one hand, toward that 
which is wrongly called subjectivity and which is rather a 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


485 


depth of objective and hidden being; the act is not performed 
for itself only, but it points to an infinite, undifferentiated 
series of other real and possible acts which I give as con- 
stituting my objective, unperceived being. Thus I try to guide 
the transcendence which transcends me and to refer it to the 
infinity of my dead-possibilities precisely in order to be the 
unsurpassable and to the exact extent to which the only im- 
surpassable is the infin ite. On the other hand, each of my 
acts tries to point to the great density of possible-world and 
must present me as bound to the vastest regions of the world. 
At the same time I present the world to the beloved, and I 
try to constitute myself as the necessary intermediary between 
her and the world; I manifest by my acts infinitely varied 
examples of my power over the world (money, position, “con- 
nections,” etc.). In the first case I try to constitute myself as 
an infinity of depth, in the second case to identify myself 
with the world. Through these different procedures I propose 
myself as unsurpassable. This proposal could not be suffi- 
cient in itself; it is only a besieging of the Other. It can not 
take on value as fact without the consent of the Other’s free- 
dom, which I must capture by making it recognize itself as 
nothingness in the face of my plenitude of absolute being. 

Someone may observe that these various attempts at ex- 
pression presuppose language. We shall not disagree with 
this. But we shall say rather that they are language or, if you 
prefer, a fundamental mode of language. For while psycholog- 
ical and historical problems exist with regard to the existence, 
the learning and the use of a particular language, there is no 
special problem concerning what is called the discovery or in- 
vention of language. Language is not a phenomenon added on 
to being-for-others. It is originally being-for-others; that is, it 
is the fact that a subjectivity experiences itself as an object 
for the Other. In a universe of pure objects language could 
under no circumstances have been “invented” since it pre- 
supposes an original relation to another subject. In the inter- 
subjectivity of the for-others, it is not necessary to invent 
language because it is already given in the recognition of the 
Other. I am language. By the sole fact that whatever I may do, 
my acts freely conceived and executed, my projects launched 
toward my possibilities have outside of them a meaning 
which escapes me and which I experience. It is in this sense 
and in this sense only — that Heidegger is right m declaring 


486 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


that I am what I say.^ Language is not an instinct of the con- 
stituted human creature, nor is it an invention of our subjec- 
tivity. But neither does it need to be referred to the pure “be- 
ing-outside-of-self” of the Dasein. It forms part of the human 
condition; it is originally the proof which a f or-itself can make 
of its being-for-others, and finally it is the surpassing of this 
proof and the utilization of it toward possibilities which are 
my possibilities; that is, toward my possibilities of being this 
or that for the Other. Language is therefore not distinct from 
the recognition of the Other’s existence. The Other’s upsurge 
confronting me as a look makes language arise as the condi- 
tion of my being. This primitive language is not necessarily 
seduction; we shall see other forms of it. Moreover we 
have noted that there is another primitive attitude confronting 
the Other and that the two succeed each other in a circle, each 
implying the other. But conversely seduction does not pre- 
suppose any earlier form of language; it is the complete real- 
ization of language. This means that language can be revealed 
entirely and at one stroke by seduction as a primitive mode of 
being of expression. Of course by language we mean all the 
phenomena of expression and not the articulated word, which 
is a derived and secondary mode whose appearance can be 
made the object of an historical study. Especially in seduction 
language does not aim at giving to be known but at causing 
to experience. 

But in this first attempt to find a fascinating language I 
proceed blindly since I am guided only by the abstract and 
empty form of my object-state for the Other. I can not even 
conceive what effect my gestures and attitudes will have since 
they will always be taken up and founded by a freedom which 
wifi surpass them and since they can have a meaning only if 
this freedom confers one on them. Thus the “meaning” of my 
expressions always escapes me. I never know exactly if I signi- 
fy what I wish to signify nor even if I am signifying anything. 

®T1u 3 fonnulation of Heidegger’s position is that of A. de Waehlens. 
La ^ phllosophie de Martin Heidegger, Louvain, 1942, p. 99. Cf. also- 
Heidegger’s text, which he quotes: “Diese Bezeugung meint nicht hier einen 
nachtraglichen und beiher laufenden Ausdruck des Menschseins, sondem sie 
macht das Dasein Menschen mit usw. (Holderlin und das Wesen der Dich- 
iung, p. 6). 

( “This affirmation does not mean here an additional and supplementary 
expression of human existence, but it does in the process make plain the 
existence of man.” Douglas Scott’s translation. Existence and Being, Chicago: 
Henry Regnery. 1949, p. 297.) 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


487 


It would be necessary that at the precise instant I should read 
in the Other what on principle is inconceivable. For lack of 
knowing what I actually express for the Other, I constitute my 
language as an incomplete phenomenon- of flight outside my- 
self. As soon as I express myself, I can only guess at the 
meaning of what I express — i.e., the meaning of what I 
am — since in this perspective to express and to be are one. 
The Other is always there, present and experienced as the one 
who gives to language its meaning. Each ^expression, each 
gesture, each word is on my side a concrete proof of the 
alienating reality of the Other. It is only the psychopath who 
can say, “someone has stolen my thought” — as in cases of 
psychoses of influence, for example.^ The very fact of expres- 
sion is a stealing of thought since thought needs the coopera- 
tion of an alienating freedom in order to be constituted as an 
object. That is why this first aspect of language — in so far as 
it, is I who employ it for the Other — is sacred. The sacred 
object is an object which is in the world and which points 
to a transcendence beyond the world. Language reveals to me 
the freedom (the transcendence) of the one who listens to 
me in silence. 

But at the same moment I remain for the Other a meaning- 
ful object — that which I have always been. There is no path 
which departing from my object-state can lead the Other to 
my transcendence. Attitudes, expressions, and words can only 
indicate to him other attitudes, other expressions, and other 
words. Thus language remains for him a simple property of a 
magical object— and this magical object itself. It is an action 
at a distance whose effect the Other exactly knows. Thus the 
word is sacred when I employ it and magic when the Other 
hears it. Thus I do not know my language any more than I 
know my body for the Other. I can not hear myself speak nor 
see myself smile. The problem of language is exactly parallel 
to the problem of bodies, and the description which is valid 
in one case is valid in the other. 

Fascination, however, even if it were to produce a state of 
being-fascinated in the Other could not by itself succeed in 
producing love. We can be fascinated by an orator, by an 
actor, by a tightrope-walker, but this does not mean that we 

® Furthermore the psychosis of influence, like the majority of psychoses, 
IS a special experience translated by myths, of a great metaphysical fact — 
here the fact of alienation. Even a madman in his own way realizes the 
human condiUon. 



488 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

love him. To be sure we can not take our eyes off him, but 
he is still raised on the ground of the world, and fascination 
does not posit the fascinating object as the ultimate term of 
the transcendence. Quite the contrary, fascination is transcen- 
dence. When then will the beloved become in turn the lover? 

The answer is easy: when the beloved projects being 
loved. By himself the Other-as-object never has enough 
strength to produce love. If love has for its ideal the appropri- 
ation of the Other qua Other (Le„ as a subjectivity which is 
looking at an object) this ideal can be projected only in terms 
of my encounter with the Other-as-subject, not with the 
Other-as-object. If the Other tries to seduce me by means of 
his object-state, then seduction can bestow upon the Other 
only the character of a precious object “to be possessed.” 
Seduction will perhaps determine me to risk much to conquer 
the Other-as-object, but this desire to appropriate an object 
in the midst of the world should not be confused with love. 
Love therefore can be bom in the beloved only from the 
proof which he makes of his alienation and his flight toward 
the Other. Still the beloved, if such is the case, will be trans- 
formed into a love only if he projects being loved; that is, if 
what he wishes to overcome is not a body but the Other’s 
subjectivity as such. In fact the only way that he could con- 
ceive to realae this appropriation is to make himself be loved. 
Thus it seems that to love is in essence the project of making 
oneself be loved. Hence this new contradiction and this 
new conflict: each of the lovers is entirely the captive of 
the Other inasmuch as each wishes to make himself loved 
by the Other to the exclusion of anyone else; but at the 
same time each one demands from the other a love which 
is not reducible to the “project of being-loved.” What he 
demands in fact is that the Other without originally seek- 
ing to make himself be loved should have at once a con- 
templative and affective intuition of his beloved as the objec- 
tive limit of his freedom, as the ineluctable and chosen foun- 
dation of his transcendence, as the totality of being and the 
supreme value. Love thus exacted from the other could not 
ask for anything; it is a pure engagement without reciprocity. 
Yet this love can not exist except in the form of a demand on 
the part of the lover. 

The lover is held captive in a wholly different way. He 
is the captive of his very demand since love is the demand to 
be loved; he is a freedom which wills itself a body and 


489 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


which demands an outside, hence a freedom which imi- 
tates the flight toward the Other, a freedom which qua freedom 
lays claim to its alienation. The lover’s freedom, in his very 
effort to make himself be loved as an object by the Other, is 
alienated by slipping into the body-for-others; that is, it is 
brought into existence with a dimension of flight toward the 
Other. It is the perpetual refusal to posit itself as pure self- 
ness, for this affirmation of self as itself would involve the 
collapse of the Other as a look and the upsurge of the Other- 
as-object — hence a state of affairs in which the very possibility 
of being loved disappears since the Other is reduced to the 
dimension of objectivity. This refusal therefore constitutes 
freedom as dependent on the Other; and the Other as subjec- 
tivity becomes indeed an unsurpassable limit of the freedom 
of the for-itself, the goal and supreme end of the for-itself 
since the Other holds the key to its being. Here in fact we 
encounter the true ideal of love’s enterprise: alienated free- 
dom. But it is the one who wants to be loved who by the mere 
fact of wanting someone to love him alienates his freedom. 

My freedom is alienated in the presence of the Other’s 
pure subjectivity which founds my objectivity. It can never be 
alienated before the Other-as-object In this form in fact the 
beloved’s alienation, of which the lover dreams, would be 


contradictory since the beloved can found the being of the 
lover only by transcending it on principle toward other objects 
of the world; therefore this transcendence can constitute the 
object which it surpasses both as a transcended object and as 
an object limit of all transcendence. Thus each one of the 
lovers wants to be the object for which the Other’s freedom is 
alienated in an original intuition; but this intuition which 
would be love in the true sense is only a contradictory ideal 
■ of the for-itself. Each one is alienated only to the exact extent 
to which he demands the alienation of the other. Each one 
wants the other to love him but does not take into accoimt 


the fact that to love is to want to be loved and that thus by 
wanting the other to love him, he only wants the other to 
want to be loved in turn. Thus love relations are a system of 
indefinite reference — analogous to the pure “reflection-reflect- 
ed’ of consciousness — under the ideal standard of the value 
love”; that is, in a fusion of consciousnesses in which each 
would preserve his otherness in order to found the 
other. This state of affairs is due to the fact that conscious- 


nesses are separated by an insurmountable nothingness, a 



490 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

nothingness which is both the internal negation of the one 
by the other and a factual nothingness between the two inter- 
nal negations. Love is a contradictory effort to surmount the 
factual negation while preserving the internal negation. I de- 
mand that the Other love me and I do everything possible to 
realize my project; but if the Other loves me, he radically 
deceives me by his very love. I demanded of him that he 
should found my being as a privileged object by maintaining 
himself as piure subjectivity confronting me; and as soon as he 
loves me he experiences me as subject and is swallowed up m 
his objectivity confronting my subjectivity. 

The problem of my being-for-others remains therefore 
without solution. The lovers remain each one for himself in 
a total subjectivity; no thin g comes to relieve them of their 
duty to make themselves exist each one for himself; nothing 
comes to relieve their contingency nor to save them from 
facticity. At least each one has succeeded in escaping danger 
from the Other’s freedom — but altogether differently than 
he expected. He escapes not because the Other makes him 
be as the object-limit of his transcendence but because the 
Other experiences him as subjectivity and wishes to experi- 
ence him only as such. Again the gain is perpetually compro- 
mised. At the start, each of the consciousnesses can at any 
moment free itself from its chains and suddenly contemplate 
the other as an object. Then the spell is broken; the Other 
becomes one mean among means. He is indeed an object for 
others as the lover desires but an object-as-tool, a perpetually 
transcended object. The illusion, the game of mirrors which 
makes the concrete reality of love, suddenly ceases. Later in 
the experience of love each consciousness seeks to shelter its 
being-for-others in the Other’s freedom. This supposes that 
the Other is beyond the world as pure subjectivity, as the ab- 
solute by which the world comes into being. But it suflBces 
that the lovers should be looked at together by a third person 
in order for each one to experience not only his own objec- 
tivation but that of the other as well. Immediately the Other 
is no longer for me the absolute transcendence which founds 
me in my being; he is a transcendence-transcended, not by 
me but by another. My original relation to him — i.e., my 
relation of being the beloved for my lover, is fixed as a dead- 
possibility. It is no longer the experienced relation between 
a limiting object of all transcendence and the freedom which 
founds it; it is a love-as-object which is wholly alienated to- 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


491 


ward the third. Such is the true reason why lovers seek soli- 
tude. It is because the appearance of a diird person, who- 
ever he may be, is the destruction of their love. But factual 
solitude (e.g., we are alone in my room) is by no means a 
theoretical solitude. Even if nobody sees us, we exist for all 
consciousnesses and we are conscious of existing for all. The 
result is that love as a fundamental mode of being-for-others 
hol^ in its being-for-others the seed of its own destruction. 

We have just defined the triple destructibility of love: in 
the first place it is, in essence, a deception and a reference to 
infinity since to love is to wish to be loved, hence to wish 
that the Other wish that I love him. A pre-ontological com- 
prehension of this deception is given in the very impulse of 
love — Whence the lover’s perpetual dissatisfaction. It does not 
come, as is so often said, from the unworthiness of being 
loved 'but from an implicit comprehension of the fact that 
the amorous intuition is, as a fundamental-intuition, an ideal 
out of reach. The more I am loved, the more I lose my being, 
the more I am thrown back on my own responsibilities, on 
my own power to be. In the second place the Other’s awak- 
ening is always possible; at any moment he can make me 
appear as an object — hence the lover’s perpetual insecurity. 
In the third place love is an absolute which is perpetually 
made relative by others. One would have to be alone in the 
world with the beloved in order for love to preserve its char- 
acter as an absolute axis of reference — Whence the lover’s per- 
petual shame (or pride — ^which here amounts to the same 
thing). 

Thus it is useless for me to have tried to lose myself in 
objectivity; my passion will have availed me nothing. The 
Other has referred me to my own unjustifiable subjectivity — 
either by himself or through others. This result can provoke 
a total despair and a new attempt to realize the identification 
of the Other and myself. Its ideal will then be the opposite 
of that which we have just described; instead of projecting 
the absorbing of the Other while preserving in him his oth- 
erness, I shall project causing myself to be absorbed by the 
Other and losing myself in his subjectivity in order to get 
rid of my own. This enterprise will be expressed concretely 
by the masochistic attitude. Since the Other is the founda- 
tion of my being-for-others, if I relied on the Other to make 
me exist, I should no longer be anything more than a being- 
in-itself founded in its being by a freedom. Here it is my 



492 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

own subjectivity wMch is considered as an obstacle to the 
primordial act by which the Other would found me in my 
being. It is my own subjectivity which above aU must be de- 
nied by my own freedom. I attempt therefore to engage my- 
self wholly in my bemg-as-object I refuse to be anything 
more than an object. I rest upon the Other, and as I experi- 
ence this being-as-object in shame, I will and I love my 
shame as the profound sign of my objectivity. As the Other 
apprehends me as object by means of actual desire, I wish 
to be desired, I make myself in shame an object of desire.* 

This attitude would resemble that of love if instead of 
seeking to exist for the Other as the object-limit of his 
transcendence, I did not rather insist on making myself be 
treated as one object among others, as an instrument to be 
used. Now it is my transcendence which is to be denied, not 
his. This time I do not have to project capturing his freedom; 
on the contrary I hope that this freedom may be and will 
itself to be radically free. Thus the more I shall feel myself 
surpassed toward other ends, the more I shall enjoy the ab- 
dication of my transcendence. Finally I project being noth- 
ing more than an object; that is, radically an in-itself. But 
inasmuch as a freedom which will have absorbed mine will 
be the foundation of this in-itself, my being will become 
again the foundation of itself. Masochism, like sadism, is the 
assumption of guilt.® I am guilty due to the very fact that I 
am an object, I am guilty toward myself since I consent to 
my absolute alienation. I am guilty toward the Other, for I 
furnish him with the occasion of being guilty — that is, of 
radically missing my freedom as such. Masochism is an at- 
tempt not to fascinate the Other by means of my objectivity 
but to cause myself to be fascinated by my objectivity-for- 
others; that is, to cause myself to be constituted as an object 
by the Other in such a way that I non-thetically apprehend 
my subjectivity as a nothing in the presence of the in-itself 
which I represent to the Other’s eyes. Masochism is charac- 
terized as a species of vertigo, vertigo not before a precipice 
of rock and earth but before the abyss of the Other’s sub- 
jectivity. 

But masochism is and must be itself a failure. In order 
to cause myself to be fascinated by my self-as-object, I should 
necessarily have to be able to realize the intuitive apprehen- 

* Ci. following section. 

® Cf. following section. ■ ' ' ' 



493 - 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

sion of this object such as it is for the Other, a thing which 
is on principle impossible. Thus I am far from being able to 
be fascinated by this alienated Me, which remains on prin- 
ciple inapprehensible. It is useless for the masochist to get 
down on his knees, to show himself in ridiculous positions, 
to cause himself to be used as a simple lifeless instrument. 
It is for the Other that he will be obscene or simply passive, 
for the Other that he will undergo these postures; for him- 
self he is forever condemned to give them to himself. It is 
in and through his transcendence that he disposes of . him- 
self as a being to be transcended. The more he tries to taste 
his objectivity, the more he will be submerged by the con- 
sciousness of his subjectivity — whence his anguish. Even the 
masochist who pays a woman to whip him is treating her as 
an instrument and by this very fact posits himself in tran- 
scendence in relation to her. 

Thus the masochist ultimately treats the Other as an ob- 
ject and transcends him toward his own objectivity. Recall, 
for example, the tribulations of Sacher Masoch, who in order 
to make himself scorned, insulted, reduced to a humiliating 
position, was obliged to make use of the great love which 
women bore toward him; that is, to act upon them just in so 
far as they experienced -themselves as an object for him. 
Thus in every way the masochist’s objectivity escapes him, 
and it can even happen — in fact usually does happen — ^that 
in seeking to apprehend his own objectivity he finds the 
Other’s objectivity, which in spite of himself frees his own 
subjectivity. Masochism therefore is on principle a failure. 
This should not surprise us if we realize that masochism is a 
“vice” and that vice is, on principle, the love of failure. But 
this is not the place to describe the structures peculiar to 
vice. It is sufficient here to point out that masochism is a 
perpetual effort to annihilate the subject’s subjectivity by 
causing it to be assimilated by the Other; this effort is ac- 
companied by the exhausting and delicious consciousness of 
failure so that finally it is the failure itself which the subject 
ultimately seeks as his principal goal.® 

® Consistent with this description, there is at least one form of exhibi- 
tionism which ought to be classed among masochistic attitudes. For example, 
when Rousseau exhibits to the washerwomen “not the obscene object but 
the ridiculous object." Cf. Confessions, Chapter UL 



494 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


IL SECOND ATTITUDE TOWARD OTHERS: 
INDIFFERENCE, DESIRE, HATE, SADISM 

The failure of the first attitude toward the Other can be 
the occasion for my assuming the second. But of course nei- 
ther of the two is really first; each of them is a fundamental 
reaction to being-for-others as an original situation. It can 
happen therefore that due to the very impossibility of my 
identifying myself with the Other’s consciousness through 
the intermediacy of my object-ness for him, I am led to turn 
deliberately toward the Other and look at him. In this case 
to look at the Other’s look is to posit oneself in one’s own 
freedom and to attempt on the ground of this freedom to 
confront the Other’s freedom. The meaning of the conflict 
thus sought would be to bring out into the open the struggle 
of two freedoms confronted as freedoms. But this intention 
must be immediately disappointed, for by the sole fact that 
I assert myself in my freedom confronting the Other, I make 
the Other a transcendence-transcended — that is, an object. 
It is the story of that failure which we are about to investi- 
gate. We can grasp its general pattern. I direct my look upon 
the Other who is looking at me. But a look can not be looked 
at. As soon as I look in the direction of the look it disap- 
pears, and I no longer see anything but eyes. At this instant 
the Other becomes a being which I possess and which recog- 
nizes my freedom. It seems that my goal has been achieved 
since I possess the being who has the key to my object-state 
and since I can cause him to make proof of my freedom in a 
thousand different ways. But in reality the whole structure 
has collapsed, for the being which remains within my hands 
is an Other-as-object. As such he has lost the key to my be- 
ing-as-object, and he possesses a pure and simple image of 
me which is nothing but one of its objective affects and 
which no longer touches me. If he experiences the effects of 
my freedom, if I can act upon his being in a thousand dif- 
ways and transcend his possibilities with all my pos- 
sibilities, this is only in so far as he is an object in the world 
and as such is outside the state of recognizing my freedom. 
My , disappointment is complete since I seek to appropriate 
the Other’s freedom and perceive suddenly that I can act 
upon the Other only in so far as this freedom has collapsed 
beneath my look. This disappointment will be the result of 



495 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

my further attempts to seek again for the Other’s freedom 
across the object which he is for me and to find privileged 
attitudes or conduct which would appropriate this freedom 
across a total appropriation of the Other’s body. These at- 
tempts, as one may suspect, are on principle doomed to 
failure. 

But it can happen also that “to look at the look” is my 
original reaction to my being-for-others. This means that in 
my upsurge into the world, I can choose myself as looking at 
the Other’s look and can build my subjectivity upon the col- 
lapse of the subjectivity of the Other. It is this attitude which 
we shall call indifference toward others. Then we are dealing 
with a kind of blindness with respect to others. But the term 
“blindness” must not lead us astray. I do not suffer this blind- 
ness as a state. I am my own blindness with regard to others, 
and this blindness includes an implicit comprehension of 
being-for-others; that is, of the Other’s transcendence as a 
look. This comprehension is simply what I myself determine 
to hide from myself. I practice then a sort of factual solip- 
sism; others are those forms which pass by in the street, those 
magic objects which are capable of acting at a distance and 
upon which I can act by means of determined conduct. I 
scarcely notice them; I act as if I were alone in the world. I 
brush against “people” as I brush against a wall; I avoid them 
as I avoid obstacles. Their freedom-as-object is for me only 
their “coefiicient of adversity.” I do not even imagine that 
they can look at me. Of course they have some knowledge of 
me, but this knowledge does not touch me. It is a question of 
pure modifications of their being which do not pass from 
them, to me and which are tainted with what we call a “suf- 
fered-subjectivity” or “subjectivity-as-object”; that is, they 
express what they are, not what I am, and they are the effect 
of my action upon themr Those “people” are functions: the 
ticket-collector is only the function of collecting tickets; the 
cafe waiter is nothing but the function of serving the patrons. 
In this capacity they will be most useful if I know their keys 
and those “master-words” which can release their mecha- 
nisms. Hence is derived that “realist” psychology which the 
seventeenth century in France has given us; hence those trea- 
tises of the eighteenth century. How To Succeed (Moyen de 
paryenir) by Beroalde de Verville, Dangerous Liaisons 
(Liaisons dangereuses) byLaclos, Treatise on Ambition (Trai- 
te de V ambition) by Herault de Sechelles, aU of which give 



496 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


to us a practical knowledge of the Other and the art of acting 
upon him. In this state of blindness I concurrently ignore the 
Other’s absolute subjectivity as the foundation of my being-in- 
itself and my being-for-others, in particular of my “body for 
others.” In a sense I am reassured, I am self-confident; that is, 
I am in no way conscious of the fact that the Other’s look can 
fix my possibilities and my body. I am in a state the very 
opposite of what we call shyness or timidity. I am at ease; I 
am not embarrassed by myself, for I am not outside; I do not 
feel myself alienated. This state of blindness can be main- 
tained for a long time, as long as my fundamental bad faith 
desires; it can be extended — ^with relapses — over several years, 
over a whole life; there are men who die without — save for 
brief and terrifying flashes of illumination — ever having sus- 
pected what the Other is. 

But even if one is entirely immersed in this state, one does 
not thereby cease to experience its inadequacy." And like all 
bad faith it is the state itself which furnishes us with the 
motives for getting out of it; for blindness as concerns the 
Other concurrently causes the disappearance of every lived 
apprehension of my objectivity. Nevertheless the Other as 
freedom and my objectivity as my alienated-self are there, 
unperceived, not thematized, but given in my very compre- 
hension of the world and of my being in the world. The con- 
ductor, even if he is considered as a pure function, refers me 
by his very function to a being-outside — even though this 
being-outside is neither apprehended nor apprehensible. 
Hence a perpetual feeling of lack and of uneasiness. This is 
because my fundamental project toward the Other — whatever 
may be the attitude which I assume — is twofold: first there 
is the problem of protecting myself against the danger which 
is incurred by my being-outside-in-the-Other’s-freedqm, and 
second there is the problem of utilizing the Other in order 
finally to totalize the detotalized totality which I am, so as to 
close the open circle, and finally to Be my own foundation. 
But on the one hand the Other’s disappearance as look throws 
me back into my unjustifiable - subjectivity and reduces my 
being to this perpetual pursued-pursuit toward an inappre- 
hensible In-itself-for-itself. Without the Other I apprehend 
fully and nakedly this terrible necessity of being free which is 
my lot; that is, the fact that I can not put the responsibility 
for making-myself-be off onto anyone but myself even though 
I have not 'chosen to be and although I have been borri'. On 



497 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

the other hand although the blindness toward the Other does 
in appearance release me from the fear of being in danger in 
the Other’s freedom, it includes despite all an implicit com- 
prehension of this freedom. It therefore places me at the ex- 
treme degree of objectivity at the very moment when I can 
believe myself to be an absolute and unique subjectivity since 
I am seen without being able to experience the fact that I am 
seen and without being able by means of the same experience 
to defend myself against my “being-seen.” I am possessed 
without being able to turn toward the one who possesses me. 
In making direct proof of the Other as a look, I defend my- 
self by putting the Other to the test, and the possibility re- 
mains for me to transform the Other into an object. But if 
the Other is an object for me while he is looking at me, then 
I am in danger without knowing it. Thus my blindness is 
anxiety because it is accompanied by the consciousness of a 
“wandering and inapprehensible” look, and I am in danger of 
its alienating me behind my back. This uneasiness can occa- 
sion a new attempt to get possession of the Other’s freedom. 
But this will mean that I am going to turn back upon the 
Other-as-object which has been merely brushing against me 
and attempt now to utilize him as an instrument in order to 
touch his freedom. But precisely because I address myself to 
the object “Other” I can not ask him to account for his 
transcendence, and since I am myself on the level where I 
make an object of the Other, I can not even conceive of what 
I wish to appropriate: Thus I am in an irritating and contra- 
dictory attitude with respect to this object which I am consid- 
ering: not only can I not obtain from him what I wish, but 
in addition this quest provokes a disappearance of the practi- 
cal knowledge pertaining to what I wish. I engage myself in 
a desperate pursuit of the Other’s freedom and midway I find 
myself engaged in a pursuit which has lost its meaning. All 
my efforts to bring back meaning to the pursuit result only 
in making me lose it further and provoking my bewilder- 
ment and my uneasiness — ^just as when I attempt to recover 
memory of a dream and this memory melts between my 
fingers leaying me with a vague and irritating impression of a 
total knowledge but with no object, or just as when I attempt 
to make explicit the content of a false recollection and the 
ve^ explanation causes it to melt away in translucency. 

^ My original attempt to get hold of the Other’s free sub- 
jectivity through his objectivity-for-me is sexual desire. Per- 



498 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


haps it will come as a surprise to see a phenomenon which is 
usually classified among “psycho-physiological reactions” now 
mentioned on the level of primary attitudes which manifest 
our original mode of realizing Being-for-Others. For the ma- 
jority of psychologists indeed, desire, as a fact of conscious- 
ness, is in strict correlation with the nature of our sexual 
organs, and it is only in connection with an elaborate 
study of these that sexual desire can be understood. But since 
the differentiated structure of the body (mammalian, vivipa- 
rous, etc.) and consequently the particular sexual structure 
(uterus. Fallopian tubes, ovaries, etc.) are in the domain of 
absolute contingency and in no way derive from the on- 
tology of “consciousness” or of the Dasein, it seems that the 
same must be true for sexual desire. Just as the sex organs are 
a contingent and particular formation of our body, so the 
desire which corresponds to them would be a contingent 
modality of our psychic life; that is, it would be described 
only on the level of an empirical psychology based on biology. 
This is indicated suflBciently by the term sex instinct, which 
is reserved for desire and all the psychic structures which 
refer to it. The term "instinct” always in fact qualifies con- 
tingent formations of psychic life which have the double 
character of being co-extensive with all the duration of this 
life — or in any case of not deriving from our “history” — and 
of nevertheless not being such that they can not be deduced 
as belonging to the very essence of the psychic. This is why 
existential philosophies have not believed it necessary to 
concern themselves with sexuality. Heidegger, in particular, 
does not make the slightest allusion to it in his existential 
analytic with the result that his Dasein appears to us as 
asexual. Of course one may consider that it is contingent for 
“human reality” to be specified as “masculine” or “feminine”; 
of course one may say that the problem of sexual differentia- 
tion has nothing to do with that of Existence {Existenz) since 
man and woman equally exist. 

These reasons are not wholly convincing. That sexual dif- 
ferentiation lies within the domain of facticity we accept 
without reservation. But does this mean that the For-itself is 
sexual “accidentally,” by the pure contingency of having this 
particular body? Can we admit that this tremendous matter of 
Ae sexual life comes as a kind of addition to the human con- 
dition? Yet it appears at first glance that desire and its oppo- 
site, sexual repulsion, are fundamental structures of being-for- 



499 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


others. It is evident that if sexuality derives its origin from 
sex as a physiological and contingent determination of man, it 
can not be indispensable to the being of the For-Others. But 
do we not have the right to ask whether the problem is not 
perchance of the same order as that which we encountered 
apropos of sensations and sense organs? Man, it is said, is a 
, sexual being because he possesses a sex. And if the reverse 
were true? If sex were only the instrument and, so to speak, 
the image of a fundamental sexuality? If man possessed a sex 
only because he is originally and fundamentally a sexual being 
as a being who exists in the world in relation with other 
men? Infantile sexuality precedes the physiological matu- 
ration of the sex organs. Men who have become eunuchs do 
not thereby cease to feel desire. Nor do many old men. The 
fact of being able to make use of a sex organ fit to fertilize 
and to procure enjoyment represents only one phase and one 
aspect of our sexual life. There is one mode of sexuality “with 
the possibility of satisfaction,” and the developed sex repre- 
-sents’ and makes concrete this possibility. But there are other 
modes of sexuality of the type which can not get satisfaction, 
and if we take these modes into account we are forced to 
recognize that sexuality appears with birth and disappears only 
with death. Moreover neither the tumescence of the penis 
nor any other physiological phenomenon can ever explain or 
provoke sexual desire — no more than the vaso-constriction or 


the dilation of the pupils (or the simple consciousness of these 
physiological modifications) will be able to explain or to pro- 
voke fear. In one case as in the other although the body plays 
an important role, we must — ^in order to understand it — ^refer 
to being-m-the-world and to being-for-others. I desire a hu- 
man being, not an insect or a mollusk, and I desire him (or 
her) as he is and as I am in situation in the world and as he 
is an Other for me and as I am an Other for him. 


The fundamental problem of sexuality can therefore be 
formulated thus: is sexuality a contingent accident bound to 
our physiological nature, or is it a necessary structure of 
being-for-itself-for-others? From the sole fact that the ques- 
hon can be posited in these terms, we see that we must go 
back to ontology to decide it. Moreover ontology can decide 
this question o^y . by determining and fixing the meaning 
of sexual existence for-the-Other. To have sex means — in 


accordance with the description of the body which we at- 
empted in the preceding chapter — ^to exist sexually for an 



500 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


Other who exists sexually for me. And it must be well under- 
stood that at first this Other is not necessarily for me — nor 
I for him — a heterosexual existent but only a being who has 
sex. Considered from the point of view of the For-itself, this 
apprehension of the Other’s sexuality could not be the pure 
disinterested contemplation of his primary or secondary sexual 
characteristics. My first apprehension of the Other as having 
sex does not come when I conclude from the distribution of 
his hair, from the coarseness of his hands, the sound of his 
voice, his strength that he is of the masculine sex. We are 
dealing there with derived conclusions which refer to an orig- 
inal state. The first apprehension of the Other’s sexuality m 
so far as it is lived and suffered can be only desire; it is by . 
desiring the Other (or by discovering myself as incapable of 
desiring him) or by apprehending his desire for me that I 
discover his being-sexed. Desire reveals to me simultaneously 
my being-sexed and his being-sexed, my body as sex and his 
body. Here therefore in order to decide the nature and onto- 
logical position of sex we are referred to the study of desire. 
What therefore is desire? 

And first, desire of what? 

We must abandon straight off the idea that desire is the 
desire of pleasure or the desire for the cessation of a pain. 
For we can not see how the subject could get out of this 
state of immanence so as to “attach” his desire to an object. 
Every subjectivist and immanentist theory will fail to explain 
how we desire a particular woman and not simply our sexual 
satisfaction. It is best therefore to define desire by its tran- 
scendent object. Nevertheless it would be wholly inaccurate 
to say that desire is a desire for “physical possession” of the 
desired object — if by “possess” we mean here “to make love 
to.” Of course the sexual act for a moment frees us from de- 
sire, and in certain cases it can be posited explicitly as the 
hoped-for issue of the desire — when desire, for example, is 
paiMul and fatiguing. But in this case it is necessary that the 
desire itself be the object which is posited as “to be over- 
come,” and this can be accomplished only by means of a re- 
flective consciousness. But desire by itself is non-reflective; 
therefore it could never posit itself as an object to be over- 
come. Only a roue represents his desire to himself, treats 
it as an object, excites it, “turns it off,” varies the means 
of assuaging it, etc. But in this case, we must observe, it is 
the desire itself which becomes the desirable. The error here 



501 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

stems from the fact that we have learned that the sexual act 
suppresses the desire. We have therefore added on a bit of 
knowledge to the desire and from outside we have added 
pleasure as desire’s normal satisfaction — ^for reasons external 
to the essence of desire {e.g., procreation, the sacred charac- 
ter of maternity, the exceptional strength of the pleasure pro- 
voked by ejaculation, the symbolic value attached to the sex- 
ual act). Thus the average man through mental sluggishness 
and desire to conform can conceive of no other goal for his 
desire than ejaculation. This is what has allowed people to 
conceive of desire as an instinct whose origin and end are 
strictly physiological since in a man, for example, it would 
have as its cause the erection and as its final limit the ejacula- 
tion. But desire by itself by no means implies the sexual 
act; desire does not thematically posit it, does not even sug- 
gest it in outline, as one sees when it is a question of the 
desire of very yoimg children or of adults who are ignorant 
of the “technique” of love. Similarly desire is not a desire of 
any special amorous practice; this is sufficiently proved by the 
diversity of sexual practices, which vary with social groups. 
In a general way desire is not a desire of doing. The “do- 
ing” is after the event, is added on to the desire from out- 
side and necessitates a period of apprenticeship; there is an 
amorous technique which has its own ends and means. There- 
fore since desire can not posit its suppression as its supreme 
end nor single out for its ultimate goal any particular act, 
it is purely and simply the desire of a transcendent object. 
Here again we find that affective intentionality of which we 
spoke in preceding chapters and which Scheler and Husserl 
have described. 

But what is the object of desire? Shall we say that desire 
IS the desire of a body? In one sense this can not be denied. 
But we must take care to understand this correctly. To be sure 
ff IS the body which disturbs us: an arm or a half-exposed 
breast or perhaps a leg. But we must realize at the start that 
we desire the arm or the uncovered breast only on the 
^ound of the presence of the whole body as an organic total- 
body itself as totality may be hidden. I may see only 
^ ^rm. But the body is there. It is from the standpoint 
or the body that I apprehend the arm as an arm. The body 
^ as much present, as adherent to the arm which I see as the 
esigns of the rug, which are hidden by the feet of the table, 
^0 present and adherent to those designs which I see. And 



502 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


my desire is not mistaken; it is addressed not to a sum of 
physiological elements but to a total form — better yet, to a 
form in situation. A particular attitude, as we shall see later, 
does much to provoke desire. Now along with the attitude 
the surroundings are given and finally the .world. But here 
suddenly we are at the opposite pole from a simple physio- 
logical pruritus; desire posits the world and desires the body 
in terms of the world and the beautiful hand in terms of the 
body. There follows exactly the procedure which we described 
in the preceding chapter, that by which we apprehend the 
Other’s body from the standpoint of his situation in the 
world. Moreover there is nothing in this which should sur- 
prise us since desire is nothing but one of the great forms 
which can be assumed by the revelation of the Other’s body. 
Yet precisely for this reason we do not desire the body as a 
purely material object; a purely material object is not in situa- 
tion. Thus this organic totality which is immediately present 
to desire is desirable only in so far as it reveals not only life 
but also an appropriate consciousness. Nevertheless, as we 
shall see, the Other’s being-in-situation which desire reveals 
is of an entirely original type. Furthermore the consciousness 
here considered is still only one property of the desired ob- 
ject; that is, it is nothing but the sense of flow of the ob- 
jects in the world, precisely in so far as this flow is cut off, 
localized, and made a part of my world. To be sure, one can 
desire a woman who is asleep, but one desires her in so far 
as this sleep appears on the ground of consciousness. Con- 
sciousness therefore remains always at the horizon of the 
desired body; it makes the meaning and the unity of the 
body. A living body as an organic totality in situation with 
consciousness at the horizon: such is the object to which de- 
sire is addressed. What does desire wish from this object? 
We can not determine this until we have answered a pre- 
liminary question: Who is the one who desires? 

The answer is clear. 1 am the one who desires, and desire 
is a particular mode of my subjectivity. Desire is conscious- 
ness since it can be only as a non-positional consciousness of 
itself. Nevertheless we need not hold that the desiring con- 
sciousness differs from the cognitive consciousness, for exam- 
ple, only in the nature of its object. For the For-itself, to 
choose itself as desire is not to produce a desire while remain- 
ing indifferent and unchanged — as the Stoic cause produces 
its effect. The For-itself puts itself on a certain plane of exis- 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 503 

tence which is not the same, for example, as that of a For- 
itself which chooses itself as a metaphysical bemg. Every 
consciousness, as we have seen, supports a certain relation 
with its own facticity. But this relation can vary from one 
mode of consciousness to another. The facticity of a pain- 
consciousness, for example, is a facticity discovered in a per- 
petual flight. The case is not the same for the facticity of 
desire. The man who desires exists his body in a particular 
mode and thereby places himself on a particular level of exis- 
tence. In fact everyone will agree that desire is not only long~ 
ing, a clear and translucent longing which directs itself through 
our body toward a certain object. Desire is defined as trouble. 
The notion of “trouble” can help us better to determine the 
nature of desire. We contrast troubled water with transparent 
water, a troubled look with a clear look. Troubled water re- 
mains water; it preserves the fluidity and the essential charac- 
teristics of water; but its translucency is “troubled” by an 
inapprehensible presence which makes one with it, which is 
everywhere and nowhere and which is given as a clogging of 
the water by itself. To be sure, we can explain the troubled 
quality by the presence of fine solid particles suspended in 
the liquid, but this explanation is that of the scientist. Our 
original apprehension of the troubled water is given us as 
changed by the presence of an invisible something which is 
not itseh distinguished and which is manifested as a pure 
factual resistance. If the desiring consciousness is troubled, 
it is because it is analogous to the troubled water. 

To make this analogy precise, we should compare sexual 
desire with another form of desire — for example, with hun- 
ger. Hunger, like sexual desire, supposes a certain state of the 
body, defined here as the impoverishment of the blood, abun- 
dant salivary secretion, contractions of the tunica, etc. These 
various phenomena are described and classified from the point 
of view of the Other. For the For-itself they are manifested 
as pure facticity. But this facticity does not compromise the 
nature of the For-itself, for the For-itself immediately flees 
h toward its possibles; that is, toward a certain state of satis- 
fied-hunger which, as we have pointed out in Part Two, is 
the In-itself-for-itself of hunger. Thus hunger is a pure sur- 
passmg of corporal facticity; and to the extent that the For- 
itself becomes conscious of this facticity in a non-thetic form, 
For-itself becomes conscious of it as a surpassed facticity. 

e body here is indeed the past, the passed-beyond. 



504 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


In sexual desire, to be sure, we can find that structure com- 
mon to all appetites — a state of the body. The Other can note 
various physiological modifications (the erection of the penis, 
the turgescence of the nipples of the breasts, changes in the 
circulatory system, rise in temperature, etc.). The desiring 
consciousness exists this facticity; it is in terms of this fac- 
ticity — we could even say through it — that the desired body 
appears as desirable. Nevertheless if we limited ourselves to 
this description, sexual desire would appear as a distinct and 
clear desire, comparable to the desire of eating and drink- 
ing. It would be a pure flight from facticity toward other 
possibles. Now everyone is aware that there is a great abyss 
between sexual desire and other appetites. We all know the 
famous saying, “Make love to a pretty woman when you 
want her just as you would drink a glass of cold water when 
you are thirsty.” We know also how unsatisfactory and even 
shocking this statement is to the mind. This is because when 
we do desire a woman, we do not keep ourselves wholly out- 
side the desire; the desire compromises me; I am the accom- 
plice of my desire. Or rather the desire has fallen wholly into 
complicity with the body. Let any man consult his own ex- 
perience; he knows how consciousness is clogged, so to speak, 
by sexual desire; it seems that one is invaded by facticity, that 
one ceases to flee it and that one slides toward a passive con- 
sent to the desire. At other moments it seems that facticity 
invades consciousness in its very flight and renders conscious- 
ness opaque to itself. It is like a yeasty tumescence of fact.. 

The expressions which we use to designate desire sufficient- 
ly show its specificity. We say that it tahes hold of you, that 
it overwhelms you, that it paralyzes you. Can one imagine 
employing the same words to designate hunger? Can one think 
of a hunger which “would overwhelm” one? Strictly speaking, 
this would be meaningful only when applied to impressions of 
emptiness. But, on the contrary, even the feeblest desire is al- 
ready overwhelming. One can not hold it at a distance as one 
can with hunger and “think of something else” while keeping 
desire as an undifferentiated tonality of non-thetic conscious- 
ness which would be desire and which would serve as a 
sign of the body-as-ground. But desire is consent to desire. 
The heavy, fainting consciousness slides toward a languor 
comparable to sleep. Everyone has been able to observe the 
appearance of desire in another. Suddenly the man who desires 
becomes a heavy tranquillity which is frightening, his eyes 


505 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

are fixed and appear half-closed, his movements are stamped 
with a heavy and sticky sweetness; many seem to be falling 
asleep. And when one “struggles against desire,” it is precisely 
this languor which one resists. If one succeeds in resisting it, 
the desire before disappearing will become wholly distinct and 
clear, like hunger. And then there will be “an awakening.” 
One will feel that one is lucid but with heavy head and beating 
heart. Naturally all these descriptions are inexact; they show 
rather the way in which we interpret desire. However they 
indicate the primary fact of desire; in desire conscious- 
ness chooses to exist its facticity on another plane. It no 
longer flees it; it attempts to subordinate itself to its own 
contingency — as it apprehends another body — i.e., another 
contingency — as desirable. In this sense desire is not only 
the revelation of the Other’s body but the revelation of my 
own body. And this, not in so far as this body is an instru- 
ment or a point of view, but in so far as it is pure facticity; 
that is, a simple contingent form of the necessity of my- 
contingency. I feel my skin and my muscles and my breath, 
and I'feel them not in order to transcend them toward some- 
thing as in emotion or appetite but as a living and inert 
datum, not simply as the pliable and discrete instrument of 
my action upon the world but as a passion by which I am 
engaged in the world and in danger in the world. The-For- 
itself is not this contingency; it continues to exist but it 
experiences the vertigo of its own body. Or, if you prefer, 
this vertigo is precisely its way of existing its body. The 
non-thetic consciousness allows itself to go over to the body, 
wishes to be the body and to be only body. In desire the 
body, instead of being only the contingency which the For- 
itself flee's toward possibles which are peculiar to it, becomes 
at the same time the most immediate possible of the For-itself. ' 
Desire is not only the desire of the Other’s body; it is — ^within 
the unity of a single act — the non-thetically lived project of 
being swallowed up in the body. Thus the final state of sexual 
desire can be swooning as the final stage of consent to the 
body. It is in this sense that desire can be called the desire of 
one body for another body. It is in fact an appetite directed 
toward the Other’s body, and it is lived as the vertigo of the 
For-itself before its own body. The being which desires is 
consciousness making itself body. 

But granted that desire is a consciousness which makes 



506 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

itself body in order to appropriate the Other’s body -appre- 
hended as an organic totality in situation with conscious- 
ness on the horizon — ^what then is the meaning of desire? 
That is, why does consciousness make itself body — of vainly 
attempt to do so — and what does it expect from the object 
of its desire? The answer is easy if we realize that in desire 
I make myself flesh in the presence of the Other in order 
to appropriate the Other’s flesh. This means that it is not 
merely a question of my grasping the Other’s shoulders or 
thighs or of my drawing a body over against me; it is nec- 
essary as well for me to apprehend them with this particular 
instrument which is the body as it produces a clogging of 
consciousness. In this sense when I grasp these shoulders, 
it can be said not only that my body is a means for touching 
the shoulders but that the Other’s shoulders are a means 
for my discovering my body as the fascinating revelation 
of facticity — that is, as flesh. Thus desire is the desire to 
appropriate a body as this appropriation reveals to me my 
body as flesh. But this body which I wish to appropriate, 
I wish to appropriate as flesh. Now at first the Other’s body is 
not flesh for me; it appears as a synthetic form in action. 
As we have seen, we can not perceive the Other’s body as 
pure flesh; that is, in the form of an isolated object maintain- 
ing external relations with other thises. The Other’s body is 
originally a body in situation; flesh, on the contrary, appears 
as the pure contingency of presence. Ordinarily it is hidden by 
cosmetics, clothing, etc.; in particular it is hidden by move- 
ments. Nothing is less “in the flesh” than a dancer even though 
she is nude. Desire is an attempt to strip the body of its move- 
ments as of its clothing and to make it exist as pure flesh; it 
is an attempt to incarnate the Other’s body. ' 

It is in this sense that the caress is an appropriation of the 
Other’s body. It is evident that if caresses were only a strok- 
ing or brushing of the surface, there could be no relation 
between them and the powerful desire which they claim 
to fulfill; they would remain on the surface like looks and 
could not appropriate the Other for me. We know well the 
deceptiveness of that famous expression, “The contact of two 
epidermises.” The caress does not want simple contact; jt 
seems that man alone can reduce the caress to a contact, and 
then he loses its unique meaning. This is because the caress 
is not a simple stroking; it is a shaping. In caressing the 



S07 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

Other I cause her’' flesh to be bom beneath my caress, under 
my fingers. The caress is the ensemble of those rituals which 
incarnate the Other. But, someone will object, was the Other 
not already incarnated? To be precise, no. The Other’s flesh 
did not exist explicitly for me since I grasped the Other’s 
body in situation; neither did it exist for her since she 
transcended it toward her possibilities and toward the object. 
The caress causes the Other to be born as flesh for me and 
for herself. And by flesh we do not mean a part of the body 
such as the dermis, the connective tissues or, specifically, 
epidermis; neither need we assume that the body will be “at 
rest” or dozing although often it is thus that its flesh is best 
revealed. But the caress reveals the flesh by stripping the 
body of its action, by cutting it off from the possibilities 
which surround it; the caress is designed to uncover the web 
of inertia beneath the action — i.e., the pure “being-there” — 
which sustains it. For example, by clasping the Other’s hand 
and caressing it, I discover underneath the act of clasping, 
which this hand is at first, an extension of flesh and bone 
which can be grasped; and similarly my look caresses when it 
discovers underneath this leaping which is at first the dancer’s 
legs, the curved extension of the thighs. Thus the caress is in 
no way distinct from the desire: to caress with the eyes and to 
desire are one and the same. Desire is expressed by the caress 
as thought is by language. The caress reveals the Other’s 
flesh as flesh to myself and to the Other. But it reveals this 
flesh in a very special way. To take hold of the Other re- 
veals to her her inertia and her passivity as a transcendence- 
transcended;- but this is not to caress her. In the caress it is 
not only my body as a synthetic form in action which caresses 
the Other; it is my body as flesh which causes the Other’s 
flesh to be born. The caress is designed to cause the 
Other’s body to be born, through pleasure, for the Other — 
and for myself — as a touched passivity in such a way that 
uiy body is made flesh in order to touch the Other’s body 
with its own passivity; that is, by caressing itself with the 
Other’s body rather than by caressing her. This is why amor- 
ous gestures have a language which could almost be said to 
be studied; it is not a question so much of taking hold of 
a part of the Other’s body as of placing one’s own body 

L pronouns in French are masculine because they refer to autrul 

(the Other) which may stand for either man or woman but which, gram- 
matically, is masculine. The feminine sounds more natural in English. 



508 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

against the Other’s body. Not so much to push or to touch 
in the active sense but to place against. It seems that I lift 
my own arm as an inanimate object and that I place it 
against the flank of the desired woman, that my fingers which 
I run over her arm are inert at the end of my hand. Thus the 
revelation of the Other’s flesh is made through my own flesh; 
in desire and in the caress which expresses desire, I incarnate 
myself in order to realize the incarnation of the Other. The 
caress by realizing the Other’s incarnation reveals to me my 
own incarnation; that is, I make myself flesh in order to impel 
the Other to realize for-herself and for me her own flesh, 
and my caresses cause my flesh to be born for me in so far as 
it is for the Other flesh causing her to be born as flesh. I make 
her enjoy my flesh through her flesh in order to compel her 
to feel herself flesh. And so possession truly appears as a 
double reciprocal incarnation. Thus in desire there is an at- 
tempt at the incarnation of consciousness (this is what we 
called earlier the clogging of consciousness, a troubled con-' 
sciousness, etc.) in order to realize the incarnation of the 
Other. 

It remains to determine what is the motive of desire — or 
if you prefer, its meaning. For anyone who has so far followed 
the descriptions which we have here attempted will have 
understood long before this that for the For-itself, to be is to 
choose its way of being on the ground of the absolute contin- 
gency of its being-there. Desire therefore does not come to 
consciousness as heat comes to the piece of iron which I hold 
near the flame. Consciousness chooses itself as desire. For this, 
of course, there must be a motive; I do not desire just any- 
thing at any time. But p we showed in Part One of this book, 
the motive is raised in terms of the past, and consciousness, 
by turning back upon it, confers on the motive its weight and 
its value. There is therefore no difference between the choice 
of the motive of the desire and the meaning of the upsurge — 
in the three ekstatic dimensions of duration — of a conscious- 
ness which makes itself desiring. This desire — like emotions 
or the imagining attitude or in general all the attitudes of the 
For-itself — has a meaning which constitutes it and surpasses 
it. The description which we have just attempted would 
hold no interest if it did not lead us to pose a further 

question: why does consciousness nihilate itself in the form 
of desire? 

One or two preliminary observations will help us in reply- 



509 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

ing to this question. In the first place we must note that the 
desiring consciousness does not desire its object on the 
ground of a world which is unchanged. In other words, it is 
not a question of causing the desirable to appear as a certain 
“this” on the ground of a world which would preserve its 
instrumental relations with us and its organization in com- 
plexes of instrumentality. The same is true of desire as of 
emotion. We have pointed out elsewhere that emotion is not 
apprehension of an exciting object in an unchanged world; 
rather since it corresponds to a global modification of con- 
sciousness and of its relations to the world, emotion ex- 
presses itself by means of a radical alteration of the world.® 
Similarly sexual desire is a radical modification of the For-it- 
self; since the For-itself makes itself be on another plane of 
being, it determines itself to exist its body differently, to 
make itself be clogged by its facticity. Correlatively the world 
must come into being for the For-itself in a new way. There 
is a world of desire. If my body is no longer felt as the 
instrument which can not be utilized by any instrument — i.e., 
as the synthetic organization of my acts in the world — ff it is 
lived as flesh, then it is as a reference to my flesh that I appre- 
hend the objects in the world. This means that I make myself 
passive in relation to them and that they are revealed to me 
from the point of view of this passivity, in it and through it 
(for passivity is the body, and the body does not cease to be 
a point of view). Objects then become the transcendent en- 
semble which reveals my incarnation to me. A contact with 
them is a caress; that is, my perception is not the utilization 
of the object and the surpassing of the present in view of an 
end, but to perceive an object when I am in the desiring 
attitude is to caress myself with it. Thus I am sensitive not so 
much to the form of the object and to its instrumentality, as 
to its inatter (gritty, smooth, tepid, greasy, rough, etc.). In 
my desiring perception I discover something like a flesh of 
objects. My shirt rubs against my skin, and I feel it. What is 
ordinarily for me an object most remote becomes the immedi- 
ately sensible; the warmth of air, the breath of the wind, the 
rays of sunshine, etc.; all are present to me in a certain way, 
^ posited upon me without distance and revealing my flesh 
y means of their flesh. From this point of view desire is not 
only the clogging of a consciousness by its facticity; it is 
correlatively the ensnarement of a body by the world. The 

Cf. Esqulsse d'lme tMorie des emotions. 1939 . 



510 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


world is made ensnaring; consciousness is engulfed in a body 
which is engulfed in the world.'-* Thus the ideal which is pro- 
posed here is being-in-the-midst-of-the-world; the For-itself 
attempts to realize a being-in-the-raidst-of-the-world as the 
ultimate project of its being-in-the-world; that is why sensual 
pleasure is so often linked with death — which is also a 
metamorphosis or “being-in-the-midst-of-the-world. ’ There is, 
for example, the theme of “pseudo-death” so abundantly 
treated in all literatures. 

But desire is not first nor primarily a relation to Ae 
world. The world here appears only as the ground for explicit 
relations with the Other. Usually it is on the occasion of the 
Other’s presence that the world is revealed as the world of 
desire. Accessorily it can be revealed as such on the occasion 
of the absence of a particular Other or even on the occasion 
of the absence of all Others. But we have already observed 
that absence is a concrete existential relation between the 
Other and me, which appears on the original ground of Being- 
for-others. I can, of course, by discovering my body in soli- 
tude, abruptly realize myself as flesh, “suffocate” with desire, 
and experience the world as “suffocating.” But this solitary 
desire is an appeal to either a particular Other or the presence 
of the undifferentiated Other. I desire to be revealed as flesh 
by means of and for another flesh. I try to cast a spell over the 
Other and make him appear; and the world of desire indi- 
cates by a sort of prepared space the Other whom I am call- 
ing. Thus desire is by no means a physiological accident, an 
itching of our flesh which may fortuitously direct us on the 
Other’s flesh. Quite the contrary, in order for my flesh to 
exist and for the Other’s flesh to exist, consciousness naust 
necessarily be preliminarily shaped in the mould of desire. 
This desire is a primitive mode of our relations with the Other 
which constitutes the Other as desirable flesh on the ground 
of a world of desire. , 

We are now in a position to make explicit the profound 
meaning of desire. In the primordial reaction to the Other s 
look I constitute myself as a look. But if I look at his look in 
order to defend myself against the Other’s freedom and to 


® Naturally it is necessary to take into account here as everywhere the 
coeflicient of adversity in things. These objects are not only “caressing.” But 
within the general perspective of the caress, they can appear also as "anti- 
caresses”; that is, with a rudeness, a cacophony, a harshness which — precisely 
because we are in the state of desire — offend us in a way that is unbearable- 


511 


CONCRETE RELATIONS -WITH OTHERS 

transcend it as freedom, then both the freedom and the look 
of the Other collapse. I see eyes; I see a being-in-the-midst- 
of-the-world. Henceforth the Other escapes me. I should like 
to act upon his freedom, to appropriate it, or at least, to make 
the Other’s freedom recognize my freedom. But this freedom 
is death; it is no longer absolutely in the world in which I en- 
counter the Other-as-object, for his . characteristic is to be 
transcendent to the world. To be sure, I can grasp the Other, 
grab hold of him, knock him down. I can, providing I have 
the power, compel him to perform this or that act, to say cer- 
tain words. But everything happens as if I wished to get hold 
of a man who runs away and leaves only his coat in my hands. 
It is the coat, it is the outer shell which I possess. I shall 
never get hold of more than a body, a psychic object in the 
midst of the world. And although all the acts of this body can 
be interpreted in terms of freedom, I have completely lost the 
key to this interpretation; I can act only upon a facticity. If 
I have preserved my awareness of a transcendent freedom in 
the Other, this awareness provokes me to no purpose by in- 
dicating a reality which is on principle beyond my reach and 
by revealing to me every instant the fact that I am missing it, 
that everything which I do is done “blindly” and takes on a 
meaning elsewhere in a sphere of existence from which I am 
on principle excluded. I can make the Other beg for mercy 
or ask ray pardon, but I shall always be ignorant of what this 
submission means for and in the Other’s freedom. 

Moreover at the same time my awareness is altered; I lose 
the exact comprehension of heing-looked-at, which is, as we 
, know, the only way in which I can make proof of the Other’s 
, freedom. Thus I am engaged in an enterprise the meaning of 
; which I have forgotten. I am dismayed confronting this Other 
^ as^ I see him and touch him but am at a loss as to what to do 
' with him. It is exactly as if I had preserved the vague 
memory of a certain Beyond which is beyond what I see and 
I touch, a Beyond concerning which I know that this is 
precisely what I want to appropriate. It is now that I make 
H desire. Desire is an attitude aiming at enchantment, 

u ^ grasp the Other only in his objective facticity, the 

problem is to ensnare his freedom within this facticity. It is 
ji °®c^sary that he be “caught” in it as the cream is caught 
by a person skimming milk. So the Other’s For-itself 
i play on the surface of his body, and be extended 

ail through his body; and by touching this body I should 


512 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


finally touch the Other’s free subjectivity. This is the true 
meaning of the word possession. It is certain that I want to 
possess the Other’s body, but I want to possess it in so far as 
it is itself a “possessed”; that is, in so far as the Other’s con- 
sciousness is identified with his body. Such is the impossible 
ideal of desire: to possess the Other’s transcendence as pure 
transcendence and at the same time as body, to reduce the 
Other to his simple facticity because he is then in the midst 
of my world but to bring it about that this facticity is a per- 
petual appresentation of his nihilating transcendence. 

But in truth the Other’s facticity (his pure being-there) 
can not be given to my intuition without a profound modi- 
fication of my own unique being. In so far as I surpass my 
personal facticity toward my own possibilities, so far as I 
exist my facticity in an impulse of flight, I surpass as well not 
only the Other’s facticity but also the pure existence of things. 
In my very upsurge I cause them to emerge in instrumental 
existence; their pure and simple being is hidden by the com- 
plexity of indicative references which constitute their manage- 
ability and their instrumentality. To pick up a fountain pen is 
already to surpass my being-there toward the possibility of 
writing, but it is also to surpass the pen as a simple existent 
toward its potentiality and once again to surpass this poten- 
tiality toward certain future existents which are the “words- 
about-to-be-formed” and finally the “book-about-to-be-wnt- 
ten.” This is why the being of existents is ordinarily veiled 
by their function. The same is true for the being of the 
Other. If the Other appears to me as a servant, as an employee, 
as a civil servant, or simply as the passerby whom I must 
avoid or as this voice which is speaking in the next room and 
which I try to understand (or on the other hand, which I 
want to forget because it “keeps me from sleeping”), it is, 
not only the Other’s extra-mundane transcendence which es- 
capes me but also his “being-there” as a pure contingent exis- 
tence in the midst of the world. This is because it is exactly in 
so far as I treat him as a servant, or as an office clerk, that I 
surpass his potentialities (transcendence-transcended, dead- 
possibilities) by the very project by which I surpass and ni- 
hilate my own facticity. If I want to return to his simple pres- 
ence and taste it as presence, it is necessary for me to reduce 
myself to my own presence. Every surpassing of my being' 
^ere is in fact a surpassing of the Other’s being-there. And 
if the world is around me as the situation which I surpass 


1 1 
t 

a. 

si 

U’ 

Oj' 


513 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

toward myself, then I apprehend the Other in terms of his 
situation; that is, already as a center of reference. 

Of course the desired Other must also be apprehended 
in situation: I desire a woman in the world, standing near a 
table, lying naked on a bed, or seated at my side. But if the 
desire flows back from the situation upon the being who is in 
situation, it is in order to dissolve the situation and to corrode 
the Other's relations in the world. The movement of desire 
which goes from the surrounding “environment” to the de- 
sired person is an isolating movement which destroys the en- 
vironment and cuts off the person in question in order to 
effect the emergence of his pure facticity. But this is possible 
only if each object which refers me to the person is fixed in 
its pure contingency at the same time that it indicates him to 
me; consequently this return movement to the Other’s being 
is a movement of return to myself as pure being-there. I de- 
stroy my possibilities in order to destroy those of the world 
and to constitute the world as a “world of desire”; that is, as 
a destructured world which has lost its meaning, a world in 
which things jut out like fragments of pure matter, like brute 
qualities. Since the For-itself is a choice, this is possible only 
if I project myself toward a new possibility: that of being 
“absorbed by my body as ink is by a blotter,” that of being 
reduced to my pure being-there. This project, inasmuch as it iS' 
not simply conceived and thematically posited but rather lived 
— that is, inasmuch as its realization is not distinct from its 
conception — is “disturbance” or “trouble.” Indeed we must 
not understand the preceding descriptions as meaning that I 
deliberately put myself in a state of disturbance with the pur- 
pose of rediscovering the Other’s pure “being-there.” Desire 
IS a lived project which does not suppose any preliminary 
deliberation but which includes within itself its meaning and 
its interpretation. As soon as I throw myself toward the 
! Other’s facticity, as soon as I wish to push aside his acts and 
! his functions so as to touch him in his flesh, I incarnate my- 
!■ self, for I can neither wish nor even conceive of the incarna- 
i tion of the Other except in and by means of my own incar- 
{ nation. Even the empty outline of a desire (as when one 
f, absentmindedly “undresses a woman with one’s look”) is 
an empty outline of troubled disturbance, for I desire only 
; with my trouble, and I disrobe the Other only by disrobing 
,i; myself; I foreshadow and outline the Other’s flesh only by 
outlinmg my own flesh. 


514 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

But my incarnation is not only the preliminary condition 
of the appearance of the Other as flesh to my eyes. My goal is 
to cause him to be incarnated as flesh in his own eyes. It is 
necessary that I drag him onto the level of pure facticity; he 
must be reduced for himself to being only flesh. Thus I shall 
be reassured as to the permanent possibilities of a transcen- 
dence which can at any instant transcend me on all sides. This 
transcendence will be no more than this; it will remain en- 
closed within the limits of an object; in addition and because 
of this very fact, I shall be able to touch it, feel it, possess it. 
Thus the other meaning of my incarnation — that is, of my 
troubled disturbance — is that it is a magical language. I make 
myself flesh so as to fascinate the Other by my nakedness and 
to provoke in her the desire for my flesh — exactly because 
this desire will be nothing else in the Other but an incarna- 
tion similar to mine. Thus desire is an invitation to desire. It 
is my flesh alone which knows how to find the road to the 
Other’s flesh and I lay my flesh next to her flesh so as to 
awaken her to the meaning of flesh. In the caress when I 
slowly lay my inert hand against the Other’s flank, I am mak- 
ing that flank feel my flesh, and this can be achieved only if it 
renders itself inert. The shiver of pleasure which it feels is 
precisely the awakening of its consciousness as flesh. If I ex- 
tend my hand, remove it, or clasp it, then it becomes again 
body in action; but by the same stroke I make my hand dis- 
appear as flesh. To let it run indifferently over the length of 
her body, to reduce my hand to a soft brushing almost 
stripped of meaning, to a pure existence, _ to a pure matter 
slightly silky, slightly satiny, slightly rough — this is to give up ' 
for oneself being the one who establishes references and un- 
folds distances; it is to be made pure mucous membrane. At 
thi§ moment the communion of desire is realized; each con- ^ 
sciousness by incarnating itself has realized the incarnation of ! 
the other; each one’s disturbance has caused disturbance to 
be born in the Other and is thereby so much enriched. By 
each caress I experience my own flesh and the Other’s flesh 
through my flesh, and I am conscious that this flesh which I 
feel and appropriate through my flesh is flesh-realized-by-the 
Other. It is not by chance that desire while a imin g at the body ^ 
as a whole attains it especially through masses of flesh which * 
are very little differentiated, grossly nerveless, hardly capable 
of spontaneous movement, through breasts, buttocks, thighs, 
stomach: these form a sort of image of pure facticity. This is ^ 


515 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

why also the true caress is the contact of two bodies in their 
mostly fleshy parts, the contact of stomachs and breasts; the 
caressing hand is too delicate, too much like a perfected in- 
strument. But the full pressing together of the flesh of two 
people against one another is the true goal of desire. 

Nevertheless desire is itself doomed to failure. As we 
have seen, coitus, which ordinarily terminates desire, is not 
its essential goal. To be sure, several elements of our sexual 
structure are the necessary expression of the nature of desire, 
in particular the erection of the penis and the clitoris. This is 
nothing else in fact but the afihrmation of the flesh by the 
flesh. Therefore it is absolutely necessary that it should not be 
accomplished voluntarily; that is, that we can not use it as 
an instrument but that we are dealing with a biological and 
autonomous phenomenon whose autonomous and involuntary 
expression accompanies and signifies the submerging of con- 
sciousness in the body. It must be clearly understood that no 
fine, prehensile organ provided with striated muscles can be a 
sex organ, a sex. If sex were to appear as an organ, it could be 
only one manifestation of the vegetative life. But contingency 
reappears if we consider that there are sexes and particular 
sexes. Consider especially the penetration of the female by the 
male. This does, to be sure, conform to that radical incarna- 
tion which desire wishes to be. (We may in fact ob- 
serve the organic passivity of sex in coitus. It is the whole 
body which advances and withdraws, which carries sex for- 
ward or withdraws it. Hands help to introduce the penis; 
the penis itself appears as an instrument which one man- 
ages, which one makes penetrate, which one withdraws, which 
one utilizes. And similarly the opening and the lubrication 
of the vagina can not be obtained voluntarily.) Yet coitus 
remains a perfectly contingent modality of our sexual life. It 
IS as much a pure contingency as sexual pleasure proper. In 
truth the ensnareraent of consciousness in the body normally 
has its^ own peculiar result — ^that is, a sort of particular ecstasy 
in which consciousness is no more than consciousness (of) 
the body and consequently a reflective consciousness of cor- 
I Pleasure in fact — ^like too keen a pain — motivates 

• the appearance of reflective consciousness which is “attention 
f to pleasure.’* 

I pleasure is the death and the failure of desire. It is the 

i *^®sire because it is not only its fulfillment but its 

lumt and its end. This, moreover, is only an organic contin- 


516 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

gency: it happens that the incarnatioE is manifested by erec- 
tion and that the erection ceases with ejaculation. But in ad- 
dition pleasure closes the sluice to desire because it motivates 
the appearance of a reflective consciousness of pleasure, whose ^ 
object becomes a reflective enjoyment; that is, it is attention 
to the incarnation of the For~itself which is refiected-on and 
by the same token it is forgetful of the Other’s incarnation. 
Here we are no longer within the province of contingency. 

Of course it remains contingent that the passage to the fas- 
cinated reflection should be effected on the occasion of that 
particular mode of incarnation which is pleasure (although 
there are numerous cases of passage to the reflective without 
the intervention of pleasure), but there is a permanent dan- 
ger for desire in so far as it is an attempt at incarnation. This 
is because consciousness by incarnating itself loses sight of the 
Other’s incarnation, and its own incarnation absorbs it to the 
point of becoming the ultimate goal. In this case the pleasure < 
of caressing is transformed into the pleasure of being ' 
caressed; what the For-itself demands is to feel within it its j 
own body expanding to the point of nausea. Immediately 
there is a rupture of contact and desire misses its goal. It i 
happens very often that this failure of desire motivates a 
passage to masochism; that is, consciousness apprehending it- 
self in its facticity demands to be apprehended and tran- 
scended as body-for-the-Other by means of the Other’s con- 
sciousness. In this case the Other-as-object collapses, the 
Other-as-look appears, and my consciousness is a conscious- 
ness swooning in its flesh beneath the Other’s look. 

Yet conversely desire stands at the origin of its own fail- 
ure inasmuch as it is a desire of taking and of appropriating- j 
It is not enough merely that troubled disturbance should effect i 
the Other’s incarnation; desire is ihe desire to appropriate this j 
incarnated consciousness. Therefore desire is naturally con- 
tinued not by caresses but by acts of taking and of penetra- 
tion. The caress has for its goal only to impregnate the Other’s 
body with consciousness and freedom. ISlow it is necessary to 
take this saturated body, to seize it, to enter into it. But by 
the very fact that I now attempt to seize the Other’s body, to 
pull it toward me, to grab hold of it, to bite it, my own body 
ceases to be flesh and becomes again the synthetic instrument 
■which I am. And by the same token the Other ceases to be an 
incarnation; she becomes once more an instrument in the 
midst of the world which I apprehend in terms of its situa- 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


517 


tion. Her consciousness, which^played on the surface of her 
flesh and which I tried to taste with my flesh, disappears 
under my sight; she remains no more than an object with 
object-images inside her. At the same time my disturbance 
disappears. This does not mean that I cease to desire but that 
desire has lost its matter; it has become abstract; it is a desire 
to handle and to take. I insist on taking the Other’s body but 
my very insistence makes my incarnation disappear. At pres- 
ent I surpass my body anew toward my own possibilities (here 
^the possibility of taking), and similarly the Other’s body 
which is surpassed toward its potentialities falls from the level 
of flesh to the level of pure object. This situation brings about 
the rupture of that reciprocity of incarnation which was pre- 
cisely the unique goal of desire. The Other may remain 
troubled; she may remain flesh for herself, and I can under- 
stand it. But it is a flesh which I no longer apprehend through 
my flesh, a flesh which is no longer anything but the property 
of an Other-as-object and not the incarnation of an Other-as- 
consciousness. Thus I am body (a synthetic totality in situa- 
tion) confronting a flesh. I find myself in almost the same sit- 
uation as that from which I tried to escape by means of desire; 
that is, I try to use the object-Other so as to make her deliver 
her transcendence, , and precisely because she is all object 
she escapes me with all her transcendence. Once again I 
have even lost the precise comprehension of what I seek 
and yet I am engaged in the search. I take and discover 
mysjelf in the process of taking, but what I take in my hands is 
something else than what I wanted to take. I feel this and I 
suffer from it but without being capable of saying what I 
wanted to take; for along with my troubled disturbance the 
very comprehension of my desire escapes me. I am like a 
sleepwalker who wakens to find himself in the process of 
gripping the edge of the bed while he can not recall the 
nightmare which provoked his gesture. It is this situation 
which is at the origin of sadism. 

Sadism is passion, barrenness, and tenacity. It is tenacity 
because it is the state of a For-itself which apprehends itself 
as engaged without understanding in what it is engaged and 
which persists in its engagement without having a clear con- 
sciousness of the goal which it has set for itself or a precise 
recollection of the value which it has attached to this engage- 

10 Dona Prouheze (Soulier de Satin, //« journSe): “II ne connaitra pas 
le goQt que fai.” (He will not know the taste which I have.) 



518 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


ment. It is barrenness because it appears when desire is 
emptied of its trouble. The sadist has reapprehended his body 
as a synthetic totality and center of action; he has resumed the 
perpetual flight from his own facticity. He experiences himself 
in the face of the Other as pure transcendence. He has a 
horror of troubled disturbance for himself and considers it a 
humiliating state; it is possible also that he simply can not 
realize it in himself. To the extent that he coldly persists, that 
he is at once a tenacity and a barrenness the sadist is im- 
passioned. His goal, like that of desire, is to seize and to 
make use of the Other not only as the Other-as-object but as a 
pure incarnated transcendence. But in sadism the emphasis 
is put on the instrumental appropriation of the incamated- 
Other. The “moment” of sadism in sexuality is the one in 
which the incarnated For-itself surpasses its own incarnation 
in order to appropriate the incarnation of the Other. Thus 
sadism is a refusal to be incarnated and a flight from aU facti- 
city and at the same time an effort to get hold of the Other’s 
facticity. But as the sadist neither can nor will realize the 
Other’s incarnation by means of his own mcarnation, as due 
to this very fact he has no resource except to treat the 
Other as an instrumental-object, he seeks to utilize the Other’s 
body as a tool to make the Other realize an incarnated ex- 
istence. Sadism is an effort to incarnate the Other through 
violence, and this incarnation “by force” must be already the 
appropriation and utilization of the Other. Sadism like desire 
seeks to strip the Other of the acts which hide him. It seeks 
to reveal the flesh beneath the action. But whereas tlxe For- 
itself in desire loses itself in its own flesh in order -to reveal 
to the Other that he too is flesh, the sadist refuses his" own 
flesh at the same time that he uses instruments to reveal by 
force the Other’s flesh to him. The object of sadism is imme- 
diate appropriation. But sadism is a blind alley, for it not 
only enjoys the possession of the Other’s flesh but at the same 
time in direct connection with this flesh, it enjoys its own 
non-incarnation. It wants the non-reciprocity of sexual rela- 
tions, it enjoys being a free appropriating power confronting 
a freedom captured by flesh. That is why the sadist wants to 
make the flesh present to the Other’s consciousness differently- 
He wants to make it present by treating the Other as an instru- 
ment; he makes it present in pain. In pain facticity invades 
consciousness, and ultimately the reflective consciousness 
is fascinated by the ' facticity of the unreflective conscious- 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


519 


ness. There is then indeed an incarnation through pain. But at 
the same time the pain is procured by means of instruments. 
The body of the torturing For-itself is no longer anything 
more than an instrument for giving pain. Thus from the start 
the For-itself can give itself the illusion of getting hold of the 
Other’s freedom instrumentally; that is, of plunging this free- 
dom into flesh without ceasing to be flie one who provokes, 
who grabs hold, who seizes, etc. 

As for the type of incarnation which sadism would like 
to realize, this is precisely what is called the Obscene. The 
obscene is a species of Being-for-Others which belongs to the 
genus of the ungraceful. But not everything which is un- 
graceful is obscene. In grace the body appears as a psychic 
being in situation. It reveals above all its transcendence as a 
transcendence-transcended; it is in act and is understood in 
terms of the situation and of the end pursued. Each move- 
ment therefore is apprehended in a perceptive process which 
in the present is based on the future. For this reason the grace- 
ful act has on the one hand the precision of a finely perfected 
machine and on the other hand the perfect unpredictability of 
the psychic since, as we have seen, the psychic is for ofliers 
the unpredictable object. Therefore the graceful act is at each 
instant perfectly understandable in so far as one considers 
that in it which has elapsed. Better yet, that part of the act 
which has elapsed is implied by a sort of aesthetic necessity, 
which stems from its perfect adaptation. At the same time 
the goal to come illiuninates the act in its totality. But all the 
future part of the act remains unpredictable although upon 
the very body of the act it is felt that the future will appear 


as necessary and adapted once it too has elapsed. It is this. 
moving image of necessity and of freedom (as the property of 
the Other-as-object) which, strictly speaking, constitutes 
grace. Bergson has given a good description of it. In grace the 
body is the instrument which manifests freedom. The grace- 
ful act, in so far as it reveals the body as a precision instru- 


ment, furnishes it at each instant with its justification for 
existing; the hand is in order to grasp and manifests at the 
start its being-in-order-to-grasp. In so far as it is apprehended 
m terms of a situation which requires grasping, the hand 
appears as itself required in its being, as summoned. And in so 
far as it manifests its freedom through the unpredictability of 
Its gesture, it appears at the origin of its being. It seems that 
the hand is itself produced as the result of a justifying 



520 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


appeal from the situation. Grace therefore forms an objective 
image of a being which would be the foundation of itself in 

order to . Facticity then is clothed and disguised by 

grace; the nudity of the flesh is wholly present, but it can not 
be seen. Therefore the supreme coquetry and the supreme 
challenge of grace is to exhibit the body unveiled with no 
clothing, with no veil except grace itself. -The most graceful 
body is the naked body whose acts enclose it with an invisible 
garment while entirely disrobing its flesh, while the flesh is 
totally present to the eyes of the spectators. 

The ungraceful, on the contrary, appears when one of the 
elements of grace is thwarted in its realization. A movement 
may become mechanical. In this case the body always forms 
part of an ensemble which justifies it but in the capacity of a 
pure instrument; its transcendence-transcended disappears, and 
along with it the situation disappears as the lateral , over- 
determination of the instrumental-objects of my universe. It 
can happen also that the actions are abrupt and violent; in 
this case it is the adaptation of the situation which collapses; 
the situation remains but an hiatus slips in like an emptiness 
between it and the Other in situation. Im this case the Other 
remains free, but this freedom is apprehended only as pure 
unpredictability; it resembles the clinamen of Epicurean 
atoms, in short an indeterminism. At the same time the end 
remains posited, and it is always in terms of the future that we 
perceive the Other’s gesture. But the fall from adaptation in- 
volves this consequence, that the perceptive interpretation by 
means of the future is always too broad or too^ narrow; it is 
approximate interpretation. Consequently the justification of 
the gesture and the being of the Other is imperfectly realized. 
In the final analysis the awkward is unjustifiable; all its facti- 
city, which was engaged in the situation, is absorbed by it, 
flows back upon it. The awkward one frees his facticity in- 
opportunely and suddenly plac^ it beneath our sight; hence 
where we expected to seize a key to the situation, spontane- 
ously emanating from the very situation, we suddenly en- 
counter the unjustifiable contingency of aii unadapted pres- 
ence; we are put face to face with the existence of an existent 

Nevertheless if the body is wholly within the act, the 
facticity is not yet flesh. The obscene appears when the body 
adopts postures which entirely strip it of its acts and which 
reveal the inertia, of its flesh. The sight of a naked body from 
behind is not obscene. But certain involuntaiy waddlings 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 521 

of the rump are obscene. This is because then it is only the 
legs which are acting for the walker, and the rump is like 
an isolated cushion which is carried by the legs and the 
balancing of which is a pure obedience to the laws of weight. 
It can not be justified by the situation; on the contrary, it is 
entirely destructive of any situation since it has the passivity 
of a thing and since it is made to rest like a thing upon the 
legs. Suddenly it is revealed as an unjustifiable facticity; it is 
de trop like every contingent It is isolated in the body for 
which the present meaning is walking; it is naked even if 
material covers it, for it no longer shares in the transcendepce- 
transcended of the body in action. Its movement of balancing 
instead of being interpreted in terms of what is to come is 
interpreted and known as a physical fact in terms of the past. 
These remarks naturally can apply to cases in which it is the 
whole body which is made flesh, either by some sort of flabbi- 
ness in its movements, which can not be interpreted by the 
situation, or by a deformity in its structure (for example the 
proliferation of the fat cells) which exhibits a super-abun- 
dant facticity in relation to the effective presence which the 
situation demands. This revealed flesh is specifically obscene 
when it is revved to someone who is not in a state of desire 
and without exciting his desire. A particular lack of adaptation 
which destroys the situation at the very moment when I appre- 
hend it and which releases to me the inert expanding of flesh 
as an abrupt appearance beneath the thin clothing of the 
movements which cover it (when I am not in a state of desire 
for this flesh) : this is what I shall call the obscene. 

Now we can see the meaning of the sadist’s demand; 
grace reveals freedom as a property of the Other-as-object 
and refers obscurely — ^just as do the contradictions in the 
sensible world in the case of Patonic recollection — to a tran- 
scendent Beyond of which we preserve only a confused 
memory and which we can reach only by a radical modifica- 
tion of our being; that is, by resolutely assuming our being- 
for-others. Grace both unvefls and veils the Other’s flesh, or 
ff you prefer, it unveils the flesh in order immediately to veil 
it; in grace flesh is the inaccessible Other. The sadist aims at 
destroying grace in order actually to constitute another syn- 
thesis of the Other. He wants to make the Other’s flesh 
appear; and in its very appearance the flesh will destroy grace, 
and facticity will reabsorb the Other’s freedom-as-object. 
This reabsorption is not annihilation; for the sadist it is the 



522 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

Other-as-free who is manifested as flesh. The identity of the 
Other-as-object is not destroyed through these avatars, but the 
relations between flesh and freedom are reversed. In grace 
freedom contained and veiled facticity; in the new synthesis 
to be effected it is facticity which contains and hides freedom. 
The sadist aims therefore at making the flesh appear abruptly 
and by compulsion; that is, by the aid not of his own flesh 
but of his body as instrument. He aims at making the Other 
assume attitudes and positions such that his body appears 
under the aspect of the obscene; thus the sadist himself re- 
mains on the level of instrumental appropriation since he 
causes flesh to be born by exerting force upon the Other, and 
the Other becomes an instrument in his hands. The sadist 
handles the Other’s body, leans on the Other’s shoulders so 
as to bend him toward the earth and to make his haunches 
stick up, etc. On the other hand, the goal of this instrumental 
utilization is immanent m the very utilization; the sadist treats 
the Other as an instrument in order to make the Other’s flesh 
appear. The sadist is the being who apprehends the Other as 
the instrument whose function is his own incarnation. The 
ideal of the sadist will therefore be to achieve the moment 
when the Other will be already flesh without ceasing to be an 
instrument, flesh to cause the birth of flesh, the moment at 
which the thighs, for example, already offer themselves in an 
obscene expanding passivity, and yet are instruments which 
are managed, which are pushed aside, which are bent so as to 
make the buttocks stick out in order in turn to incarnate 
them. But let us not be deceived here. What the sadist thus so 
tenaciously seeks, what he wants to knead with hi's hands 
and bend under his wrists is the Other’s freedom. The free- 
dom is there in that flesh; it is freedom which is this flesh 
since there is a facticity of the Other. It is therefore this free- 
dom which the sadist tries to appropriate. 

Thus the sadist’s effort is to ensnare the Other in his flesh 
by means of violence and pain, by appropriating the Other’s 
body in such a way that he treats it as flesh so as to cause 
flesh to be bom. But this appropriation surpasses the body 
which it appropriates, for its purpose is to possess the body 
only in so far as the Other’s freedom has been ensnared with- 
in it. This is why the sadist will want manifest proofs of this 
enslavement of the Other’s freedom through the flesh. He 
will aim at making the Other ask for pardon, he will use tor- 
ture and threats to force the Other to humiliate himself, to 



- 523 - 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

deny what he holds most dear. It is often said that this is done 
through the will to dominate or thirst for power. But this 
explanation is either vague or absurd. It is the will to 
dominate which should be explained first. This can not be 
prior to sadism as its foundation, for in the same way and on 
the same plane as sadism, it is born from anxiety in the face of 
the- Other. In fact; if the sadist is pleased upon obtaining a 
denial by mieans of torture, this is for a reason analogous to 
that which allows us to interpret the meaning of Love. We 
have seen in fact that Love does not demand the abolition of 
the Other’s freedom but rather his enslavement as freedom; 
that is, freedom’s self-enslavement. Similarly the sadist does 
not seek to suppress the freedom of the one whom he 
tortures but to force this freedom freely to identify itself with 
the tortured flesh. This is why the moment of pleasure for the 
torturer is that in which die victim betrays or humiliates 
himself. 

In fact no matter what pressure is exerted on the victim, 
the abjuration remains free; it is a spontaneous production, 
a response to a situation; it manifests human-reality. No matter 
what resistance the victim has offered, no matter how long 
he has waited before begging for mercy, he would have been 
able despite all to wait ten minutes, one minute, one second 
longer. He has determined the moment at which the pain be- 
came unbearable. The proof of this is the fact that he will 
later live out his abjuration in remorse and shame. Thus he is 
entirely responsible for it. On the other hand the sadist for his 
part considers himself entirely the cause of it. If the victim 
resists and refuses to beg for mercy, the game is only that 
much more pleasing. One more turn of the screw, one extra 
twist and the resistance will finally give in. The sadist posits 
himself as “having all the time in the world.” He is calm, 
he does not hurry. He uses his instruments like a technician; 
he tries them one after another as the locksmith tries various 
keys in a keyhole. He enjoys this ambiguous and contradictory 
situation. On the one hand indeed he is the one who patiently 
at the heart of universal determinism employs means in view 
of an end which will be automatically attained — just as the 
lock will automatically open when the locksmith finds the 
right” key; on the other hand, this determined end can be 
realized only with the Other’s free and complete cooperation. 
Therefore until the last the end remains both predictable 
and unpredictable. For the sadist the object realized is am- 



524 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


biguous, contradictory, without equilibrium since it is both 
the strict consequence of a technical utDization of determinism 
and the manifestation of an unconditioned freedom. The 
spectacle which is offered to the sadist is that of a freedom 
which struggles against the expanding of the flesh and which 
finally freely chooses to be submerged in the flesh. At the 
moment of the abjuration the result sought is attained: the 
body is wholly flesh, panting and obscene; it holds the posi- 
tion which the torturers ' have given to it, not that which it 
would have assumed by itself; the cords which bind it hold it 
as an inert thing, and thereby it has ceased to be the object 
which moves spontaneously- In the abjuration a freedom 
chooses to be wholly identified with- this body; this distorted 
and heaving body is the very image of a broken and enslaved 
freedom. 

These few remarks do not aim at exhausting the problem 
of sadism. We wanted only to show that it is as a seed in 
desire itself, as the failure of desire; in fact as soon as I seek to 
take the Other’s body, which through my incarnation I have 
induced to incarnate itself, I break the reciprocity of incarna- 
tion, I surpass my body toward its own possibilities, and I . 
orient myself in the direction of sadism. Thus sadism and 
masochism are the two reefs on which desire may founder — 
whether I surpass my troubled disturbance toward an appro- 
priation of the Other’s flesh or, intoxicated with my own 
trouble, pay attention only to my flesh and ask nothing of the 
Other except that he should be the look which aids me in 
realizing my flesh. It is because of this inconstancy on the part 
of desire and its perpetual oscillation between these two perils 
that “normal” sexuality is commonly designated as “sadistic- 
masochistic.” 

Nevertheless sadism too — ^like blind indifference and like 
desire — bears within itself the cause of its own failure. In the 
first place there is a profound incompatibility between the 
apprehension of the body as flesh and its instrumental utiliza- 
tion. If I make an instrument out of flesh, it refers me to 
other instruments and to potentialities, in short to a future; it 
is partially justified in its being-there by the situation which 
I create around myself, just as the presence of nails and of a 
picture to be nailed on the wall justifies the existence of the 
hammer. Suddenly the body’s character as flesh — that is, its 
unutihzable facticity— gives way to that of an instrumental- 
thing. The complex “flesh-as-instrument” which the sadist 



525 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WiTH OTHERS 

has attempted to create disintegrates. This profound ^s- 
integration can be hidden so long as 'the fleshy is the m- 
strument to reveal flesh, for in this way I constitute ^ in- 
strument with, an immanent end. But when the incarnation is 
achieved, when I have indeed before me a panting body, 
then I no longer know how to utilize this flesh. No goal 
can be assigned to it, precisely because I have effected the 
appearance of its absolute contingency. It is there, and it is 
there for nothing. As such I can not get hold of it as flesh; I 
can not integrate it in a complex, system of instrumentality 
without its materiality as flesh, its “fleshliness” immediately 
escaping me. I can only remain disconcerted before it in a 
state of contemplative astonishment or else incarnate myself 
in turn and allow myself again to be troubled, so as to place 
myself once more at least on the level where flesh is revealed 
to flesh in its entire “fleshliness.” Thus sadism at the very mo- 
ment when its goal is going to be attained gives way to de- 
sire. Sadism is the failure of desire, and desire is the failure of 
sadism. One can get out of the circle only by means of satia- 
tion and so-called “physical possession.” In this a new syn- 
thesis of sadism and of desire is given. The tumescence of sex 
manifests incarnation, the fact of “entering into” or of being 
“penetrated” symbolically realizes the sadistic and masochistic 
attempt to appropriate. But if pleasure enables us to get out 
of the circle, this is because it kills both the desire and the 
sadistic passion without satisfying them. 

At the same time and on a totally different level sadism 
harbors a new motive for failure. "V^at the sadist seeks to 
appropriate is in actuality the transcendent freedom of the 
victim. But this freedom remains on principle out of reach, 
^d the more the sadist persists in treating the other as an 
instrument, the more this freedom escapes him. He can act 
upon the freedom only by making it an objective property of the 
Other-as-object; that is, on freedom in the midst of the world 
with its dead-possibilities. But since the sadist’s goal is to 
recover his being-for-others, he misses it on principle, for the 
omy Other with whom he has to do is the Other in the world 
h^ “images in his head” of the sadist assaulting 

sadist discovers his error when his victim looks at him; 
that IS, when the sadist experiences the absolute alienation of 
nis bemg in the Other’s freedom; he realizes then not only 
mat he has not recovered his being-outside but also that the 



526 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


activity by which he seeks to recover it is itself transcended 
and fixed in “sadism” as an habitus and a property with its 
cortege of dead-possibilities and that this transformation takes 
place through and for the Other whom he wishes to enslave. 
He discovers then that he can not act on the Other’s freedom 
even by forcing the Other to humiliate himself and to beg for 
mercy, for it is precisely in and through the Other’s absolute 
freedom that there exists a world in which there are sadism 
and instruments of torture and a hundred pretexts for being 
humiliated and for foreswearing oneself. Nobody has better 
portrayed the power of the victim’s look at his torturers than 
Faulkner has done in the final pages of Light in August. The 
“good citizens” have just hunted down the Negro, Christ- 
mas, and have castrated him. Christmas is at the point of 
death: 

“But the man on the floor had not moved. He just lay 
there, with his eyes open and empty of everything save ' 
consciousness, and with something, a shadow, about his 
mouth. For a long moment he looked up at them with 
peaceful and unfathomable and unbearable eyes. Then his 
face, body, all, seemed to collapse, to fall in upon itself 
and from out the slashed garments about his hips and 
loins the pent black blood seemed to rush like a released 
breath. It seemed to rush out of his pale body like the 
rush of sparks from a rising rocket; upon that black blast 
the man seemed to rise soaring into their memories for- 
ever and ever. They are not to lose it, in whatever peace- 
ful valleys, beside whatever placid and reassuring streams 
of old age, in the mirroring face of whatever children 
they will contemplate old disasters and newer hopes. It 
will be there, musing, quiet, steadfast, not fading and not 
particularly threatful, but of itself alone serene, of itself 
alone triumphant. Again from the town, deadened a little 
by the walls, the scream of the siren mounted toward its 
unbelievable crescendo, passing out of the realm of 
hearing.”ii 

Thus this explosion of the Other’s look in the world of 
the sadist causes the meaning and goal of sadism to collapse.- 

Tr. The italics are Sartre’s. I have quoted directly from Faulkner rather 
translating back into English from the French translation which Sartre 
used, wilham Faulkner, Light in August. New York: Modern Library, p. 407. 


527 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

The sadist discovers that it was that freedom which he 
wished to enslave, and at the same time he realizes the futility 
of his efforts. Here once more we are referred from the being- 
in-the-act-of-looking to the being-looked-at; we have not got 
out of the circle. 

We have not thought by these few remarks to exhaust the 
problem of sex, still less that of possible attitudes toward the 
Other. We have wished simply to show that the sexual attitude 
is a primary behavior toward the Other. It goes without say- 
ing that this behavior necessarily includes within it the orig- 
inal contingency of being-for-others and that of our own 
facticity. But we can not admit that this behavior is subject 
from the start to a physiological and empirical constitution. 
As soon as “there is” the body and as soon as “there is” an 
Other, we react by desire, by Love, and by the derived atti- 
tudes which we have mentioned. Our physiological structure 
only causes the symbolic expression, on the level of absolute 
contingency, of the fact that we are the permanent possibility 
of assuming one or the other of these attitudes. Thus we shall 
be able to say that the For-itself is sexual in its very upsurge in 
the face of the Other and that through it sexuality comes into 
the world.' 

Obviously we do not claim that all attitudes toward the 
Other are reducible to those sexual attitudes which we have 
just described. If we have dealt with them at considerable 
length, it is for two reasons: first because they are fundamen- 
tal, and second because all of men’s complex patterns of con- 
duct toward one another are only enrichments of these two 
original attitudes (and of a third — hate — which we are 
going to describe next) . Of course examples of concrete con- 
duct (collaboration, conflict, rivalry, emulation, engagement, 
obedience, etc.)^^ are infinitely more delicate to describe, for 
they depend on the historic situation and the concrete partic- 
ularities of each relation of the For-itself with the Other; but 
they all include as their skeleton — so to speak — sexual rela- 
tions. This is not because of the existence of a certain libido 
wMch would slip in everywhere but simply because the atti- 
tudes which we have described are the fundamental projects 
by which the For-itself realizes its being-for-others and tries to 
transcend this factual situation. 

This is not the place to show what of love and desire can 
e contained in pity, admiration, disgust, envy, gratitude, etc. 

Also maternal love, pity, kindness, etc. 



528 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS . , 

But each man will be able to determine it by referring to his 
own experience, as well as to the eidetic intuition of these 
various essences. Naturally this does not mean that these 
different attitudes are simply disguises borrowed by sexuality. 
But it must be understood that sexuality is integrated in them 
as their foundation and that they include and surpass it just 
as the notion of a circle includes and surpasses that of a ro- 
tating line segment, one of whose extremities is fixed. These 
fundamental-attitudes can remain hidden just as a skeleton is 
veiled by the flesh which surrounds it; in fact this is what 
usually happens. The contingency of bodies, the structure of 
the original project which I am, the history which I his- 
toricize can usually determine the sexual attitude to remain im- 
plicit, inside more complex conduct. For example, it is only 
seldom that one explicitly desires an Other “of the same sex.” 
But behind the prohibitions of morality and the taboos of 
society the original structure remains, at least in that particular 
form of “trouble” which is called sexual disgust And it is not 
necessary to understand this permanence of the sexual proj- 
ect as if it dwelt “within us” in the unconscious state. A 
project of the For-itself can exist only in conscious form. It 
exists as integrated with a particular structure in which it is 
dissolved. This is what psychoanalysts have had in mind when 
they have made of sexual affectivity a tabula rasa deriving 
all its determinations from the individual history. Only it is 
not necessary to hold that sexuality at its origin is undeter- 
mined; in fact it includes all its determinations from the mo- 
ment of the upsurge of the For-itself into a world where 
“there are” Others. What is undetermined and what must be 
fixed by each one’s history is the particular type of relation 
with the Other in which the sexual attitude (desire-love, 
masochism-sadism) will be manifested in its explicit purity. 

It is precisely because these attitudes are original that we 
have chosen them in order to demonstrate the circle of rela- 
tions with the Other. Since these attitudes are in fact inte- 
grated in all attitudes toward Others, they involve in their 
circularity the integrality of ail conduct toward the Other. 
Just as Love finds its failure within itself and just as Desire 
arises from the death of Love in order to collapse in turn 
and give way to Love, so all the patterns of conduct toward 
the Other-as-object include within themselves an implicit and 
veiled reference to an Other-as-subject, and this reference is 
t eir death. Upon the death of a particular conduct toward 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS - - S29 

the Other-as-object arises a new attitude which aims at 
getting hold of the Other-as-subject, and this in turn reveals 
its instability and collapses to give way to the opposite con- 
duct. Thus we are indefinitely referred from the Other-as-ob- 
ject to the Other-as-subject and vice versa. The movement is 
never arrested, and this movement with its abrupt reversals of 
direction constitutes our relation with the Other. At whatever 
moment a person is considered, he is in one or the other of 
these attitudes — unsatisfied by the one as by the other. We can 
maintain ourselves for a greater or less length of time in the 
attitude adopted depending on our bad faith or depending 
on the particular circumstances of our history. But never will 
either attitude be sufficient in itself; it always points ob- 
scurely in the direction of its opposite. This means that we 
can never hold a consistent attitude toward the Other unless 
he is simultaneously revealed to us as subject and as object, as 
transcendence-transcending and as transcendence-transcended 
— ^which is on principle impossible. Thus ceaselessly tossed 
from being-a-look to being-looked-at, falling from one to the 
other in alternate revolutions, we are always, no matter what 
attitude is adopted, in a state of instability in relation to the 
Other. We pursue the impossible ideal of the simultaneous 
apprehension of his freedom and of his objectivity. To borrow 
an expression from Jean Wahl, we are — in relation to the 
Other — sometimes in a state of trans-descendence (when we 
apprehend him as an object and integrate him with the 
world), and sometimes in a state of trans-ascendence (when 
we experience him as a transcendence which transcends us). 
But neither of these two states is sufficient in itself, and we 
shall never place ourselves concretely on a plane of equality; 
that is, on “the plane where the recognition of the Other’s free- 
dom would involve the Other’s recognition of our freedom. 

The Other is on principle inapprehensible; he flees me 
when I seek him and possesses me when I flee him. Even if 
I should want to act according to the precepts of Kantian 
morality and take the Other’s freedom as an unconditioned 
end, still this freedom would become a transcendence-tran- 
scended by the mere fact that I make it my goal. On the 
other hand, I could act for his benefit only by utilizing the 
Other-as-object as an instrument in order to realize this free- 
dom. It would be necessary, in fact, that I apprehend the 
Other in situation as an object-instrument, and my sole power 
would be then to modify the situation in relation to the Other 



530 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

and the Other in relation to the situation. Thus I am brought 
to that paradox which is the perilous reef of all liberal politics 
and which Rousseau has defined in a single word; I must 
“force” the Other to be free. Even if this force is not always 
nor even very frequently exercised in the form of violence, 
nevertheless it still governs the relations of men with each 
other. If I offer comfort and reassurance, it is in order to dis- 
engage the Other’s freedom from the fears or griefs which 
darken it; but consolation or reassuring argument is the or- 
ganization of a system of means to an end and is designed to 
act upon the Other and consequently to integrate him in turn 
as an instrumental-thing in the system. Furthermore the com- 
forter effects an arbitrary distinction between the freedom 
which he is identifying with the use of Reason and the pur- 
suit of the Good, on the one hand, and the affliction which 
appears to him the result of a psychic determinism. Therefore 
the problem is to separate the freedom from the affliction as 
one separates out each of two components of a chemical 
product. By the sole fact that the comforter is considering 
freedom as capable of being separated out, he transcends it 
and does violence to it, and he can not on the level where he 
is placed apprehend this truth: that it is freedom itself which 
makes itself the affliction and that consequently to act so as to 
free freedom from affliction is to act against freedom. 

It does not follow, however, that an ethics of “laissez- 
faire” and tolerance would respect the Other’s freedom any 
better. From the moment that I exist I establish a fac- 
tual limit to the Other’s freedom. I am this limit, and each 
of my projects traces the outline of this limit around the 
Other. Charity, laissez-faire, tolerance — even an attitude of 
abstention — are each one a project of myself which engages 
me and 'which engages the Other in his acquiescence. To 
realize tolerance with respect to the Other is to cause the 
Other to be thrown forcefully into a tolerant world. It is to 
remove from him on principle those free possibilities of 
courageous resistance, of perseverance, of self-assertion which 
he would have had the opportunity to develop in a world 
of intolerance. This fact is made still more manifest if we 
consider the. problem of education: a severe education treats 
thp child as an instrument since it tries to bend him by 
force to values which he has not admitted, but a liberal 
education in order to make use of other methods nevertheless 
chooses a priori principles and values in the name of which 



531 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

the child will be trained. To train the child by persuasion 
and gentleness is no less to compel him. Thus respect for 
the Other’s freedom is an empty word; even if we could 
assume the project of respecting this freedom, each attitude 
which we adopted with respect to the Other would be a 
violation of that freedom which we claimed to respect The 
extreme attitude which would be given as a total indifference 
toward the Other is not a solution either. We are already 
thrown in the world in the face of the Other; our upsurge 
is a free limitation of his freedom and nothing — not even 
suicide — can change this original situation. Whatever our 
acts may be, in fact, we- must accomplish them in a world 
where there are already others and where I am de trap in 
relation to others. . 

It is from this singular situation that the notion of guilt 

and of sin seems to be derived. It is before the Other that 

I am guilty. I am guilty first when beneath the Other’s look 
I experience my alienation and my nakedness as a fall from 
grace which I must assume. This is the meaning of the fa- 
mous line from Scripture: “They knew that they were naked.” 
Again I am guilty when in turn I look at the Other, because 

by the very fact of my own self-assertion I constitute him 

as an object and as an instrument, and I cause him to ex- 
perience that same alienation which he must now assume. 
Thus original sin is my upsurge in a world where there 
are others; and whatever may be my further relations with 
others, these relations will be only variations on the original 
theme of my guilt. 

But this guilt is accompanied by helplessness without this 
helplessness ever succeeding in cleansing me of my guilt. 
Whatever I may do for the Other’s freedom, as we have seen, 
.my efforts are reduced to treating the Other as an instrument 
and. to positing his freedom as a transcendence-transcended. 
,But on the other hand, no matter what compelling power 
I use, I shall never touch the Other save in his being-as- 
object. I shall never be able to accomplish anything except 
to furnish his freedom with occasions to manifest itself with- 
out my ever succeeding in increasing it or diminishing it, 
in directing it or in getting hold of it. Thus I am guilty 
toward the Other in my very being because the upsurge ,of 
my being, in spite of itself, bestows on the Other a new dimen- 
sion of being; and on the other handT am powerless either 
to profit from my fault or to rectify it. 



532 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

A for-itself which by historicizing itself has experienced 
these various avatars can determine, with full knowledge of 
the futility of its former attempts, to pursue the death of 
the Other. This free determination is called hate. It implies 
a fundamental resignation; the for-itself abandons its claim 
to realize any union with the Other; it gives up using the 
Other as an instrument to recover its own being-in-itself. 
It wishes simply to rediscover a freedom without factual 
limits; that is, to get rid of its own inapprehensible being- 
as-object-for-the-Other and to abolish its dimension of 
alienation. This is equivalent to projecting the realization 
of a world in which the Other does not exist. The for-it- 
self which hates consents to being only for-itself; instructed 
by its various experiences of the impossibility of making use 
of its being-for-others, it prefers to be again only a free 
nihilation of its being, a totality detotalized, a pursuit which 
assigns to itself its own ends. The one who hates projects no 
longer being an object; hate presents itself as an absolute 
positing of the freedom of the for-itself before the Other. 
This is why hate does not abase the hated object, for it 
places the dispute on its true level. What I hate in the 
Other is not this appearance, this fault, this particular 
action. What I hate is his existence in general as a tran- 
scendence-transcended. This is why hate implies a recogni- 
tion of the Other’s freedom. But this recognition is abstract 
and negative; hate knows only the Other-as-object and at- 
taches itself to this object. It wishes to destroy this object 
in order by the same stroke to overcome the transcendence 
which haunts it. This transcendence is only dimly sensed as 
an inaccessible beyond, as the perpetual possibility of the 
alienation of the for-itself which hates. It is therefore never 
apprehended for itself; moreover it could not be so without 
becoming an object. I experience it as a perpetually fleeing 
character in the Other-as-object, as a “not-given,” “undevel- 
oped” aspect of his most accessible empirical qualities, as 
a sort of perpetual threat which warns me that “I am missing 
the point.” This is why one hates right through the revealed 
psychic but not the psychic itself; this is why also it is indif- 
ferent whether we hate the Other’s transcendence through 
what we empirically call his vices or his virtues. What I hate 
IS the^ whole psychic-totality in so far as it refers me to the 
ther s transcendence. I do not lower myself to hate my 
particular objective detail. Here we find the distinction be- 



533 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

tweea hating, and' despising. And hate, does not necessarily 
appear on the occasion of my being subjected to something 
evil. On the contrary, it can arise when one would theoretically 
expect gratitude — that is, on the occasion of a kindness. The 
occasion which arouses hate is simply an act by the Other 
which puts me in the state of being subject to his freedom.- 
This act is in itself humiliating; it is humiliating as the con- 
crete revelation of my instrumental object-ness in the face 
of the Other’s freedom. This revelation is immediately ob- 
scured, is buried in the past and becomes opaque. But it 
leaves in me the feeling that there is “something” to be 
destroyed^ if I am to free myself. This is the reason, more- 
over, why gratitude is so close to hate; to be, grateful for 
a kindness is to recognize that the Other was entirely free 
in acting as he has done. No compulsion, not even that of 
duty, has determined him m it. He is wholly responsible for 
his act and for the values which have presided over its ac- 
complishment. I, myself, have been only the excuse for it, 
the matter on which his act has been exercised. In view of 
this recognition the for-itself can project love or hate as it 
chooses; it can no longer ignore the Other. 

The second consequence of these observations is that hate 
is the hate of all Others in one Other. What I want to at- 
tain symbolically' by pursuing the death of a particular Other 
is the general principle of the existence of others. The Other 
whom I hate actually represents all Others. My project of 
suppressing him is a project of suppressing others in general; 
that is, of recapturing my non-substantial freedom as for-itself. 
In hate there is given an understanding of the fact that my 
dimension of being-alienated is a real enslavement which 
comes to me through others. It is the suppression of this 
enslavement which is projected. That is why hate is a black 
feeling; that is, a feeling which aims at the suppression of 
an Other and which qua project is consciously projected 
against the disapproval of others. I disapprove of the hate 
which one person bears toward another; it makes me uneasy 
and I seek to suppress it because although it is not explicit- 
y aimed at me, I know that it concerns me and that it is 
realized against me. And in fact it aims at destroying me not 
in so far as it would seek to suppress me but in so far as it 
prmcipally lays claim to my disapproval in order to pass be- 
yond It. Hate demands to be hated — so that to hate is 



534 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

equivalent to an uneasy recognition of the freedom of 
the one who hates. 

But hate too is in turn a failure. Its initial project is to 
suppress other consciousnesses. But even if it succeeded in 
this — i.e., if it could at this moment abolish the Other — 
it could not bring it about that the Other had not been. 
Better yet, if the abolition of the Other is to be lived as the 
triumph of hate, it implies the explicit recognition that the 
Other has existed. Immediately my being-for-others by slip- 
ping into the past becomes an irremediable dimension of 
myself. It is what I have to be as having-been-it. Therefore 
I can not free myself from it. At least, someone will say, 
I escape it for the present, I shall escape it in the future. 
But no. He who has once been for-others is contaminated 
in his being for the rest of his days even if the Other should 
be entirely suppressed; he will never cease to apprehend his 
dimension of being-for-others as a permanent possibility 
of his being. He can never recapture what he has alienated;, 
he has even lost all hope of acting on this alienation and 
turning it to his own advantage since the destroyed Other 
has carried the key to this alienation along with him to the 
grave. What I was for the Other is fixed by the Other’s 
death and I shall irremediably be it in the past I shall be 
it also and in the same way in the present if I persevere in 
the attitude, the projects, and the mode of life which have 
been judged by the Other. The Other’s death constitutes 
me as an irremediable object exactly as my own death would 
do. Thus the triumph of hate is in its very upsurge trans- 
formed into failure. Hate does not enable us to get out of 
the circle. It simply represents the final attempt, the attempt 
of despair. After the failure of this attempt nothing remains , 
for the for-itself except to re-enter the circle and allow itself 
to be indefinitely tossed from one to the other of the two 
fundamental attitudes.^® 

III. “BEING-WITH” (MITSEIN) AND THE “WE” 

Doubtless someone will want to point out to us that our 
description is incomplete since it leaves no place for cer- 
tain concrete experiences in which we discover ourselves 

** These considerations do not exclude the possibility of an ethics of 
deliverance and salvation. But this can be achieved only after a radical 
Sion which we can not discuss here. 



535 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

not in conflict with the Other but in community with him. 
And it is true that we frequently use the word “we.” The 
very existence and use of this grammatical form necessarily 
refers us to a^real experience of the Mitsein. “We” can be 
subject and in this form it is identical with the plural of 
the “I.” To be- sure, the ' parallel between grammar and 
thought is in many cases more than doubtful; in fact, the 
question should be revised completely and the relation of 
language to thought studied from an entirely new approach. 
Yet it is nonetheless true that the “we” subject does not 
appear even conceivable unless it refers at least to the thought 
of a plurality of subjects which would simultaneously appre- 
hend one another as subjectivities, that is, as transcendences- 
transcending and not as transcendence-transcended. If the 
word “we” is not simply a flatus vocis, it denotes a concept 
subsuming an infin ite variety of possible experiences. And 
these experiences appear a priori to contradict the experience 
of my being-as-object for the Other and the experience of 
the Other’s being-as-object for me. In the “we,” nobody is the 
object. The “we” includes a plurality of subjectivities which 
recognize one another as subjectivities. Nevertheless this rec- 
ognition is not the object of an explicit thesis; what is explicit- 
ly posited is a common action or the object of a common 
perception. “We” resist, “we” advance to the attack, “we” con- 
demn the guilty, “we” look at this or that spectacle. Thus the 
recognition of subjectivities is analogous to that of the self- 
recognition of the non-thetic consciousness. More precisely, 
it must be effected laterally by a non-thetic consciousness 
whose thetic object is this or that spectacle in the world. 

The best example of the “we” can be furnished us by the 
spectator at a theatrical performance whose consciousness is 
exhausted in apprehending the imaginary spectacle, in fore- 
seeing the events through anticipatory schemes, in positing 
imaginary beings as the hero, the traitor, the captive, etc., 
a spectator, who, however, in the very upsurge which makes 
him a consciousness of the spectacle is constituted non-thet- 
ically as consciousness (of) being a co-spectator of the 
spectacle.^ Everyone knows in fact that unavowed embarrass- 
ment which grips us in an auditorium half empty and, on 
the other hand, that enthusiasm which is let loose and is 
remforced in a full and enthusiastic hall. Moreover it is 
certain that the experience of the we-as-subject can be man- 
ifested in any circumstance whatsoever. I am on the pavement 



536 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

in front of a cafe; I observe the other patrons and I know 
myself to be observed. We remain here in the most ordinary 
case of conflict with others (the Other’s being-as-object for 
me, my being-as-object for the Other). But suddenly some 
incident occurs in the street; for example, a slight collision 
between a jeep and a taxi. Immediately at the very instant 
when I become a spectator of the .incident, I experience my 
self non-thetically as engaged in “we.” The earlier rivalries, 
the slight conflicts have disappeared, and the consciousnesses 
which furnished the matter of the “we” are precisely those 
of all the patrons: “we” look at the event, “we” take part. It is 
this unanimity which Romains wanted to describe in Vie 
unanime or in Vin blanc de la Villette. Here we are brought 
back again to Heidegger’s Mitsein. Was it worthwhile then 
to criticize it earlier?^^ 

We shall only remark here that we had no intention of 
casting doubt on the experience of the “we.” We limited 
ourselves to showing that this experience could not be the 
foundation of our consciousness of the Other. It is clear, 
in fact, that it could not constitute an ontological structure 
of human reality; we have proved that the existence of the 
for-itself in the midst of others was at its origin a metaphysi- 
cal and contingent fact. In addition it is clear that the “we” 
is not an inter-subjective consciousness nor a new being 
which surpasses and encircles its parts as a synthetic whole 
in the manner of the collective consciousness of the sociolo- 
gists. The “we” is experienced by a particular consciousness; 
it is not necessary that all the patrons at the cafe should be 
conscious of being “we” in order for me to experience my- 
self as being engaged in a “we” with them. Everyone is fa- 
miliar with this pattern of everyday dialogue: “We are very 
dissatisfied.” “But no, my dear, speak for yourself.” This 
implies that there are aberrant consciousnesses of the “we”— - 
which as such are nevertheless perfectly normal conscious- 
nesses. If this is the case, then in order for a consciousness 
to get the consciousness of being engaged in a “we,” 
it is necessary that the other consciousnesses which enter into 
community with it should be first given in some other way; 
that is, either in the capacity of a transcendence-transcending 

or as a transcendence-transcended. The “we” is a certain par- 
ticular experience which is produced in special cases on the 

** Part Three, Chapter One. 



537 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

foundation of being-for-others in general. The being-for- 
others precedes and founds the being-with-others. 

Furthermore the philosopher who wants to study the 
“we” must take precautions and know of what he speaks. 
There is not only a We-as-subject; grammar teaches' us that 
there is also a We-as-compleraent — i.e., a We-as-object.^® Now 
from all which has been said up till now it is easy to 
understand that the “we” in “We are looking at them” can 
not be on the same ontological plane as the “us” in “They 
are looking at us.” There is no question here of subjectivi- 
ties qua subjectivities. In the sentence, “They are looking 
at me," I want to indicate that I experience myself as an 
object for others, as an alienated Me, as a transcendence- 
transcended. If the sentence,' “They are looking at us,” is to 
indicate a real experience, it is necessary that in this exper- 
ience I make proof of the fact that I am engaged with others 
in a community of transcendences-transcended, of alienated 
“Me’s.” The “Us” here refers to an experience of being- 
objects in common. Thus there are two radically different 
forms of the experience of the “we” and the two forms cor- 
respond exactly to the being-in-the-act-of-looking and the 
being-looked-at which constitute the fundamental relations 
of the For-itself with the Other. It is these two forms of the 
“we” which must be studied next. 

A. The Us-Object 

We shall begin by examining the second of these exper- 
iences; its meaning can be grasped more easily and it will 
perhaps serve as a means of approach to the study of the 
Other. First we must note that the Us-object precipitates us 
into the world; we experience it in shame as a community 
alienation. This is illustrated by that significant scene in 
which convicts choke with anger and shame when a beauti- 
ful, elegantly dressed woman comes to visit their ship, sees 
their rags, their labor, and their misery. We have here a 
common shame and a common alienation. How then is it 
possible to experience oneself as an object in a community 
of objects? To answer this we must return to the fundamen- 
tal characteristics of our being-for-others. 

difference between English and French presents a certain 
icuUy for the translator since nous in French is used for both subject 
and object— I.e., »we” and “us.” 



538 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

Hitherto we have considered the simple case in which 
I am alone confronting the Other who is also alone. In this 
case I look at him- or he looks at me. I seek to transcend his 
transcendence or I experience my own as transcended^ and I 
feel my possibilities as dead-possibilities. We form a pair 
and we are in situation each one in relation to the Other. 
But this situation has objective existence only for the one 
or the Other. There is no reverse side to our reciprocal rela- 
tion. In our description we have not yet taken into account 
the fact that my relation with the Other appears on the infinite 
ground of my relation and of his relation to all Others; 
that is, to the quasi-totality of consciousnesses. As a result my 
relation to this Other, which I experienced earlier as the foun- 
dation of my being-for-others, or the relation of the Other 
to me can at each instant and according to the motives which 
intervene be experienced as objects for Others. This will 
be manifested clearly in the case of the appearance of a third 
person. Suppose, for example, that the Other is looking at 
me. At this moment I experience myself as wholly alienated, 
and I assume myself as such. Now the Third comes on 
the scene. If he looks at me, I experience them as forming 
a community, as “They” (they-subject) through my alienation. 
This “they” tends, as we know, toward the impersonal “some- 
body” or “one” {on). It does not alter the fact that I am 
looked at; it does not strengthen (or barely strengthens) 
my original alienation. But if the Third looks at the Other 
who is looking at me, the problem is more complex. I can 
in fact apprehend the Third not directly but upon the Other, 
who becomes the Other-looked-at (by the Third). Thus the 
third transcendence transcends the transcendence which tran- 
scends me and thereby contributes to disarming it. There is 
constituted here a metastable state which will soon decom- 
pose depending upon whether I ally myself to the Third so 
as to look at the Other who is then transformed into 
our object — and here I experience the ' We-as-subject of which 
we will speak later — or whether I dook at the Third ^d 
thus transcend this third transcendence which transcends 
the Other. In the latter case the Third becomes an object in 
my^ universe, his possibilities are dead-possibilities, he can not 
deliver me from the Other. Yet he looks at the Other who 
is looking at me. There follows a situation which we -shall 
call indeterminate and inconclusive since I am an object for 
the Other who is an- object for the Third who is an object 



539 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

for me. Freedom alone, by supporting itself on one or the 
other of these relations can give a structure to this situation. 

But it can just as well happen that the Third looks at the 
Other at whom I am looking. In this case I can look at 
both of them and thus disarm the look of the Third. The 
Third and the Other will appear to me then as They-as-objects 
or “Them.” I can also grasp upon the Other the look 
of the Third so that without seeing the Third I apprehend 
upon the Other’s behavior the fact that he knows himself 
to be looked-at. In this case I experience upon the Other and 
apropos of the Other the Third’s transcendence-tran- 
scending. The Third experiences it as a radical and absolute 
alienation of the Other. The Other flees away from my world; 
he no longer belongs to me; he is an object for another 
transcendence. Therefore he does not lose his character as 
an object, but he becomes ambiguous; he escapes me not by 
means of his own transcendence but through the transcen- 
dence of the Third, Whatever I can apprehend upon him and 
concerning him at present, he is always Other, as many 
times Other as there are Others to perceive him and think 
about him. In order for me to reappropriate the Other for 
myself, it is necessary for me to look at the Third and to 
confer an object-state upon him. But in the first place, this is 
not always possible; moreover the Third can be himself 
looked at by other Thirds; that is, can be indefinitely the 
Other whom I do not see. There results an original instability 
in the Other-as-object and an infinite pursuit by the For-itself 
which seeks to reappropriate this object-state. This is the 
reason, as we have seen, why lovers seek solitude. 

It is possible also for me to experience myself as looked-at 
by the Third while I look at the Other. In this case I experi- 
ence my alienation non-positionally at the same time that I 
posit the alienation of the Other. My possibilities of utilizing 
the Other as an instrument are experienced by me as dead- 
possibilities, and my transcendence which prepares to tran- 
scend the Other toward my own ends falls back into tran- 
scendence-transcended. I let go my hold. The Other does not 
thereby become a subject, but I no longer feel myself 
qualified to keep him in an object-state. He becomes a neutral; 
something which is purely and simply there and with which 

have nothing to do. This will be the case, for example, if 
1 am smprised in the process of beating and humiliating a 
man helpless to defend himself. The appearance of the Third 



540 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


“disconnects” me. The helpless man is no longer either “to be 
beaten” or “to be humiliated”; he is nothing more than a pure 
existence. He is nothing more, he is no longer even “a help- 
less man.” Or if he becomes so again, this will be through the 
Third serving as interpreter; / shall learn from the Third 
that the Other was a helpless man (“Aren’t you ashamed? You 
have attacked one who is helpless,” etc,) The quality of 
helplessness will in my eyes be conferred on the Other by the 
T hir d; it will no longer be part of my world but of a uni- 
verse in which I am with the helpless man for the Third. 

This brings us finally to the case with which we are pri- 
marily concerned: I am engaged in a conflict with the Other. 
The Third comes on the scene and embraces both of us with 
his look. Correlatively I make proof of my alienation and my 
object-ness. For the Other I am outside as an object in the 
midst of a world which is not “mine.” But the Other whom 
I was looking at or who was looking at me undergoes the same 
modification, and I discover this modification of the Other 
simultaneously with that which I experience. The Other is an 
object in the midst of the world of the Third. Moreover this 
object-state is not a simple modification of his being which is 
parallel with that which I undergo, but the two object- 
states come to me and to the Other in a global modification 
of the situation in which I am and in which the Other finds 
himself. Before the look of the Third appeared there were two 
situations, one circumscribed by the possibilities of the Other 
in which I was in the capacity of an instrument, and a reverse 
situation circumscribed by my own possibilities and including 
the Other. Each of these situations was the death of the other 
and we could grasp the one only by objectivizing the other. 
Now at the appearance of the Third I suddenly experience 
the alienation of my possibilities, and I discover by the same 
token that the possibilities of the Other are dead-possibilities. 
The situation does not thereby disappear; but it flees outside 
both my world and the Other’s world; it is constituted in ob- 
jective form in the midst of a third world. In this third world 
it is seen, judged, transcended, utilized, but suddenly there is 
effected a leveling of the two opposed situations; there is no 
longer any structure of priority which goes from me to the 
Other or conversely from the Other to me since our possibili- 
ties are equally dead-possibilities for the Third. This means 
that I suddenly experience the existence of an objective sit- 
uation-form in the world of the Third in which the Other and 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH-OTHERS 541 

I shall figure as equivalent structures in solidarity with each 
other. Conflict does not arise, m this objective situation, 
from the free upsurge of our transcendences, but it is estab- 
lished and transcended by the Third as a factual given which 
defines us and holds us together. The Other’s possibility of 
striking 'me and my possibility of defending myself, far from 
being exclusive of one another, are now complementary to 
each other, imply one another, and involve one another for the 
Third by virtue of their being dead-possibilities, and this is 
precisely what I experience non-thetically and' without having 
any knowledge of it. Thus what I experience is a being-out- 
side in which I am organized with the Other in an indis- 
, soluble, objective whole, a whole in which I am fundamentally 
no longer distinct from the Other but which I agree in soli- 
darity with the Other to constitute. And to the extent that on 
principle I ''assume my being-outside for the Third, I must 
similarly assume the Other’s being-outside; what I assume is 
a community of equivalence by means of which I exist en- 
gaged in a form which like the Other I agree to constitute. In 
a word I assume myself as engaged outside in the Other, and 
I assume the Other as engaged outside in me. 

I carry the fundamental assumption of this engagement 
before me without apprehending it; it is this free recognition 
of my responsibility as including the responsibility for the 
Other which is the proof of the Us-bbject. Thus the Us-ob- 
ject is never known in the sense that reflection releases to us 
the knowledge of our Self, for example; it is never felt in the 
sense that a feeling reveals to us a particular concrete object 
as antipathetic, hateful, troubling, etc. Neither is it simply 
experienced, for what is experienced is the pure situation of ^ 
solidarity with the Other. The Us-object is revealed to us 
only by my assuming the responsibility for this situation; 
that is, because of the internal reciprocity of the situation, I 
must of- necessity — in the heart of my free assumption — 
assume also the Other. Thus in the absence of any Third per- 
son I can say, “I am fighting against the Other.” But as soon 
as the Third appears, the Other’s possibilities and my own are 
leveled into dead-possibilities and hence the relation becomes ^ 
reciprocal; I am forced to make proof of the fact that “we ” 
each other.” In fact the statement, “I fight him 
he fights me” would be plainly inadequate. Actually I 
ugnt him because he fights me and reciprocally. The project 
or combat has germinated in his mind as in mine, and for the 



542 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


Third it is united into a single project common to that 
they-as-object which he embraced with his look and which 
even constitutes the unifying synthesis of this “Them.” 
Therefore I must assume myself as apprehended by the Third 
as an integral part of the “Them.” And this “Them” which is 
assumed by a subjectivity as its meaning-for-others becomes 
the “Us.” 

Reflective consciousness can not apprehend this “Us.” Its 
appearance coincides on the contrary with the collapse of 
the “Us”; the For-itself disengages itself and posits its self- 
ness against Others. In fact it is necessary to conceive that 
originally the belonging to the Us-object is felt as a^still more 
radical alienation on the part of the For-itself since the latter 
is no longer compelled only to assume what it is for the Other 
but to assume also a totality which it is not although it forms 
an integral part of it. In this sense the Us-object is an abrupt 
experience of the human condition as engaged among Others 
as an objectively established fact. The Us-object although 
experienced on the occasion of a concrete solidarity and cen- 
tered in this solidarity (I shall be ashamed precisely because 
we have been caught in the act of fighting one another) has a 
meaning which surpasses the particular circumstance in which 
it is experienced and which aims at including my belonging 
as an object to the human totedity (minus the pure conscious- 
ness of the Third) which is equally apprehended as an object. 
Therefore it corresponds to an experience of humiliation and 
impotence; the one who experiences himself as constituting 
an C/s with other men feels himself trapped among an infinity 
of strange existences; he is alienated radically and without 
recourse. 

Certain situations appear more likely than others to 
arouse the experience of the Us. In particular there is com- 
munal work: when several persons experience themselves as 
apprehended by the Third while they work in solidarity to 
produce the same object, the very meaning of the manufac- 
tured object refers to the working collectivity as to an “Us.” 
The movement which I make and which is evoked by the 
subsequent hoisting up has meaning only if it is preceded by 
this movement on the part of my neighbor and followed by 
t at movement on the part of that other workman. There re- 
sults a form of the “Us” more easily accessible since it is the 
reqmrement of the object itself and its potentialities and its 
coeflicient of adversity which refer to us workmen as an Us- 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 543 

object: We have therefore experienced ourselves as appre- 
hended as an “Us” across a material object “to be created.” 
Materiality puts its seal on our solid community, and we 
appear to ourselves as an instrumental disposition and tech- 
nique of means, each one having a particular place assigned by 
an end. 

But if some situations thus appear empirically more 
favorable to the upsurge of the “Us,” we must not lose sight 
of the fact that every human situation, since it is an engage- 
ment in the midst of others, is experienced as “Us” as soon 
as the Third appears. If I am walking in the street behind this 
rnq n and see only his back, I have with him the minimum of 
technical and practical relations which can be conceived. Yet 
once the Third looks at me, looks at the road, looks at the 
Other, I am bound to the Other by the solidarity of the “Us”: 
we are walking one behind the Other on la rue Blomet on a 
July morning. There is always a point of view from which 
diverse for-itselfs can be united in an “Us” by a look. Con- 
versely just as the look is only the concrete manifestation of 
the original fact of my existence for others, just as therefore 
I experience myself existing for the Other outside any indi- 
vidual appearance of a look, so it is not necessary that a con- 
crete look should penetrate and transfix us in order for us to 
be able to experience ourselves as integrated outside in an 
“Us.” So long as the detotalized-totality “humanity” exists, it 
is possible for some sort of plurality of individuals to experi- 
ence itself as “Us” in relation to all or part of the rest of 
men, whether these men are present “in flesh and blood” or 
whether they are real but absent. Thus whether in the pres- 
ence or in the absence of the Third I can always apprehend 
myself either as pure selfness or as integrated in an “Us.” This 
brings us to certain special forms of the “Us,” in particular 
to that which we call “class consciousness.” 

Class consciousness is evidently the assuming of a partic- 
ular . Us” on the occasion of a collective situation more 
pldnly structured than usual. It matters little here how we 
detoe this situation; what interests us is only the nature of the 
s which is assumed. If a society, so far as its economical 
or political structure is concerned, is divided into oppressed 
classes and oppressing classes, the situation of the oppressing 
classes presents the oppressed classes with the image of a 
perpetual Third who considers them and transcends them by 

IS treedom. It is not the hard work, the low living standard, 



544 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

or the privations endured which will constitute the oppressed 
collectivity as a class. The solidarity of work, in fact, could 
(as we shall see in the following section) constitute the 
laboring collectivity as a “We-subject” in so far as this collec- 
tivity — whatever may be the coefficient of adversity of things 
— ^makes proof of itself as transcending the intra-mundane 
objects toward its own ends. The living standard is a wholly 
relative thing, and appreciation of it will vary according to 
circumstances (it can be simply endured or accepted or de- 
manded in the name of a common ideal). The privations if 
considered in themselves have the result of isolating the per- 
sons who suffer them rather than of uniting them and are in 
general sources of conflict. Finally, the pure and simple com- 
parison which the members of the oppressed collectivity can 
make between the harshness of their conditions and the 
privileges enjoyed by the oppressing classes can not in any 
case suffice to constitute a class consciousness; at most it 
will provoke individual jealousies or particular despairs; it 
does not possess the possibility of unifying and of making 
each one assume the responsibility for the unification. But the 
ensemble of these characteristics as it constitutes the condition 
of the oppressed class is not simply endured or accepted. It 
would be equally erroneous, however, to say that from the 
beginning it is apprehended by the oppressed class as im- 
posed by the oppressing class. On the contrary, a long time 
is necessary to construct and spread a theory of oppression. 
And this theory will have only an explicative value. The pri- 
mary fact is that the member of the oppressed collectivity, 
who as a simple person is engaged in fundamental conflicts 
with other members of this collectivity (love, hate, rivalry of 
interests, etc.), apprehends his condition and that of other 
members of this collectivity as looked-at and thought about 
by consciousnesses which escape him; 

The "master,” the “feudal lord,” the “bourgeois,” the 
“capitalist” all appear not only, as powerful people who com- 
mand but in addition and abovq- all Thirds; that is, as those 
who are outside the oppressed community and for whom this 
community exists. It is therefore for them and in their free- 
dom that the reality of the oppressed class is going to exist. 
They cause it to be born by their look. It is to them and 
through them that there is revealed the identity of my con- 
ffition and that of the others who are oppressed; it is for them 
t at I exist in a situation organized with others and that my 



545 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


possibles as dead-possibles are strictly equivalent with the 
possibles o£ others; it is for them that 1 am a worker and it ts 
through and in their revelation as the Other-as-a-looK that 1 
experience myself as one among others. This means that 1 
discover the “Us” in which I am integrated or “the class 
outside, in the look of the Third, and it is this collective 
alienation which I assume when saying “Us.” From this^point 
of view the privileges of the Third and “our” burdens, ^ our 
miseries have value at first only as a signification; they signify 
the independence of the Third in relation to “Us* ; they pre- 
sent our alienation to us more plainly. Yet as they are none- 
theless endured, as in particular our work, our fatigue are 
nonetheless suffered, it is across this endured suffering that 
- I experience my being-looked-at-as-a-thing-engaged-in-a- 
totality-of-things. It is in terms of my suffering, of my 
misery that I am collectively apprehended with others by the 
Third; that is, in terms of the adversity of the world, in terms 
of the facticity of my condition. Without the Third, no 
matter what might be the adversity of the world, I should 
apprehend myself as a triumphant transcendence; with the 
appearance of the Third, “I” experience “Us” as apprehended 
in terms of things and as things overcome by the world. 

Thus the oppressed class finds its class unity in the knowl- 
edge which the oppressing class has of it, and the appearance 
among the oppressed of class consciousness corresponds to the 
assumption in shame of an Us-object. We shall see in the' 
following section what “class consciousness” can be for a 
member of the oppressing class. What is important for us 
here- in any case and what is sufficiently illustrated by the 
example which we have just chosen is that the experience of 
the Us-object presupposes that of the being-for-others, of 
which it is only a more complex modality. Therefore by vir- 
tue of being a particular case it falls within the compass of 
our preceding descriptions. Moreover it encloses within itself 


a power of disintegration since it is experienced through 
s ame and since the “Us” collapses as soon as the for-itself 
reclaims its selfness in the face of the Third and looks at him 
individual claim of selfness is moreover only one 
finn suppressing the Us-object. The assump- 

eyam 1 ® Us in Certain strongly structured cases, as, for 

class consciousness, no longer implies the project of 
g oneself from the “Us” by an individual recovery of 


546 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


selfness but rather the project of freeing the whole “Us” 
from the object-state by transforming it into a We-subject. 

At bottom we are dealing with a variation of the project 
already described of transforming the one who is lookmg into 
the one who is looked-at; it is the usual passage from one to 
the other of the two great fundamental attitudes of the for- 
others. The oppressed class can, in fact, affirm itself as a We- 
subject only in relation to the oppressing class and at the 
latter’s expense; that is, by transforming it in turn into “they- 
as-objects” or “Them.” The person who is engaged objec- 
tively in the class aims at involving the whole class in and 
by means of his project of reversal. In this sense the expe- 
rience of the Us-object refers to that of the We-subject' just as 
the experience of my being-an-object-for-others refers me to 
the experience of being-an-object-for-others-for-me. Similarly 
we shall find in what is called “mob psychology” collective 
crazes {Boulangism, etc.) which are a particular form of love. 
The person who says “Us” then reassumes in the heart of the 
crowd the original project of love, but it is no Jonger on his 
own account; he asks a Third to save the whole collectivity in 
its very object-state so that he may sacrifice his freedom to it 
Here as above disappointed love leads to masochism. This is ’ 
seen in the case in which the collectivity rushes into servitude 
and asks to be treated as an object. The problem involves 
here again multiple individual projects of men in the crowd; 
the crowd has been constituted as a crowd by the look of the 
leader or the speaker; its unity is an object-unity which each 
one of its members reads in the look of the Third who dom- 
inates it, and each one then forms the project of losing him- 
self in this object-ness, of wholly abandoning his selfness in 
order to be no longer anything but an instrument in the hands 
of the leader. But this instrument in which he wants to be 
dissolved is no longer his pure and simple personal br- 
others; it is the totality, objective-crowd. The monstrous 
materiality of the crowd and its profound reality (although 
only experienced) are fascinating for each of its members; 
each one demands to be submerged in the crowd-instrument 
by the look of the leader.^® 

In these various instances we have seen that the Us-object 
is always constituted in terms of a concrete situation in which 
one part of the detotalized-totality “humanity” is immersed to 

Cf. the numerous cases of a refusal of selfness. The for-itself refuses 
to emerge m anguish outside the “Us" 



547 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 

the exclusion -of another part. We are “Us” only in the eyes 
of Others, and it is in terms of the Others’ look that we 
assume ourselves as “Us.” But this implies that there can 
exist an abstract, unrealizable project of the for-itself toward 
an absolute totalization of itself and of all Others. This effort 
at recovering the human totality can not take place without 
positing the existence of a Third, who is on principle distinct 
from humanity and in whose eyes humanity is wholly object. 
This unrealizable Third is simply the object of the limiting- 
concept of otherness. He is the one who is Third in relation 
to all possible groups, the one who in no case can enter into 
community with any human group, the Thkd in relation to 
whom no other can constitute himself as a third. This con- 
cept is the same as that of the being-who-looks-at and who 
can never be looked-at; that is, it is one with the idea of God. 
But if God is characterized as radical absence, the effort to 
realize humanity as ours is forever renewed and forever re- 
sults in failure. Thus the humanistic “Us” — the Us-object — ^is 
proposed to each individual consciousness as. an ideal impossi- 
ble to attain although everyone keeps the illusion„of being 
able to succeed in it by progressively enlarging the circle of 
communities to which he does belong. This humanistic “Us” 
remains ' an empty concept, a pure indication of a possible 
extension of the ordinary usage of the “Us.” Each time that 
we use the “Us” in this sense (to designate suffering humanity, 
sinful humanity, to determine an objective historical meaning 
by considering man as an object which is developing its 
potentialities) we limit ourselves to indicating -a certain 
concrete experience to be undergone in the presence of the 
absolute Third; that- is, of God. Thus the limiting-concept 
of humanity (as the totality of the Us-object) and the 

limiting-concept of God imply one another and are cor- 
relative. 


B. The We-Subject 

T is the world which makes known to us our belonging to a 
^bject-community, especially the existence in the world of 
Tno^ objects. These objects have been worked on by 

^ that is, for a non-individualized and 

j transcendence which coincides with the un- 
ntiated look which we called earlier the “They.” The 



548 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

worker — servile or not — ^works in the presence of an undiffer- 
entiated and absent transcendence and can only outline the 
free possibilities of this transcendence in the vacuum — so to 
speak — upon the object on which he is working. In this 
sense the worker, whoever he may be, experiences in work his 
being-an-instrument for others. Work, when it is not strictly 
destined for the ends of the worker himself, is a mode of 
alienation. The alienating transcendence is here the consumer; 
that is, the “They” whose projects the worker is limited to 
anticipating. As soon as I use a manufactured object, I meet 
upon it the outline of my own transcendence; it indicates to 
me the movement to be made; I am to turn, push, draw, or 
lean. Moreover we are dealing here with an hypothetical im- 
perative; it refers me to an end which is equally in the world: 
if I want to sit down, if I want to open the box, etc. And this 
end itself has been anticipated in the constitution of the ob- 
ject as an end posited by some transcendence. It belongs at 
present to the object as its most peculiar potentiality. Thus 
it is true that the manufactured object makes me known to 
myself as “they”; that is, it refers to me the image of my 
transcendence as that of any transcendence whatsoever. And 
if I allow my possibilities to be channeled by the instrument 
thus constituted, I experience myself as any transcendence: 
to go from the subway station at “Trocadero” to “Sevres- 
Babylon,” “They” change at “La Motte-Picquet.” This change 
is foreseen, indicated on maps, etc.; if I change routes at 
La Motte-Picquet, I am the “They” who change. To be 
sure, I differentiate myself by each use of the subway as 
much by the individual upsurge of my being as by the dis- 
tant ends which I pursue. But these final ends are only on the 
horizon of my act. My immediate ends are the ends of the 
‘They,” and I apprehend myself as interchangeable with any 
one of my neighbors. In this sense we lose our real individu- 
ality, for the project which we are is precisely the project 
which others are. In this subway corridor there is only one 
and the s^e project, inscribed a long time ago in matter, 
where a living and undifferentiated transcendence comes to 
be absorbed. To the extent that I realize myself in solitude as 
any transcendence, I have only the experience of undiffer- 
entiated-being {e.g., if alone in my room I open a jar of 
preserves with the proper opener) . But if this indiffer- 
entiated transcendence projects its projects, whatever they 
are, in connection with other transcendences experienced as 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


549 


rpnl nreseaces similarly absorbed *jn projects identical wij 
mv oroiects then I realize ray project as one among thous^ds' 
7Scd projects projected by one and the same undiffer- 
enUated tranLndence. Hian I have the expenence ^ ^ com- 
mon transcendence directed toward a unique end of wto I 
Zn only an ephemeral particularization; 1 insert myself into 
the great human stream which from the time that the subway, 
first existed has flowed incessantly into the corridors of the 
station “La Motte-Picquet-Grenelle.” But we must note the. 

following: j j V 

(1) This experience is of the psychological order and not 

ontological. It in no way corresponds to a real imification of 
the for-itselfs under consideration. Neither does it stem from 
an immediate experience of their transcendence as such (as in 
being-looked-at), but it is motivated rather by the double 
objectivizing apprehension of the object transcended in com-- 
mon and of the bodies which surround mine. In particular the , 
fact that I am engaged with others in a common rhythm which 
I contribute to creating is especially likely to lead me to appre- 
hend myself as engaged in a We-subject This is the meaning 
of the cadenced march of soldiers; it is the meaning also of 
the rhythmic work of a crew. It must be noted, however, 
that in this case the rhythm emanates freely from me; it is a 
project which I realize by means of my transcendence; it 
synthesizes a future with a present and a past within a per- 
spective of regular repetition; it is I who produce this rhythm. 
But at the same time it melts into the general rhythm of the 
work or of the march of the concrete community which sur- 
roun^ me. It gets its meaning only through this general 

^ experience, for example, when the 
rnythm which 1 adopt is contretemps. Yet the enveloping 
of my rh^ by the rhythm of the Other is apprehended 
laterally. H do not utilize the collective rhythm as an in- 

contemplate it— in the sense in which, 
lor example, I might contemplate dancers on a stae'e It 

?o7o nT “c Without being an 

my 7nsSe'n7 -“.‘T"* PossibUities: but I slip 

—to accomnlish n ^ transcendence, and my own end 

Place!!is77nd 

the peculiar end nf tiiA distinct from 

I came to be bom is b„Fn 

% as the coUecfoe rhv*7 wi* me and later- 

ve rhythm, it is my rhythm to the extent 



550 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


that it is their rhythm and conversely. There precisely is the 
motive for the experience of the We-subject; it is JSnally our 
rhythm. 

Yet we can see that this can be only if by the earlier accep- 
tance of a common end and of common instruments I con- 
stitute myself as an undifferentiated transcendence by rejecting 
my personal ends beyond the collective ends at present pur- 
sued. Thus whereas in the experience of being-for-others the 
upsurge of a dimension of real and concrete being is the con- 
dition for the very experience, the experience of the We- 
subject is a pure psychological, subjective event in a single 
consciousness; it corresponds to an inner modification of the 
structure of this consciousness but does not appear on the 
foundation of a concrete ontological relation with others and 
does not realize any Mitsein. It is a question only of a way 
of feeling myself in the midst of others. Of pourse this ex- 
perience can be looked on as the symbol of an absolute, meta- 
physical unity of all transcendences; it seems, in fact, that 
it overcomes the original conflict of transcendences by making 
them converge in the direction of the world. In this sense 
the ideal We-subject would be the “we” of a humanity which 
would make itself master of the earth. But the experience of 
the “we” remains on the ground of individual psychology 
and remains a simple symbol of the longed-for unity of tran- 
scendences. It is, in fact, in no way a lateral, real apprehen- 
sion of subjectivities as such by a single subjectivity; the sub- 
jectivities remain out of reach and radically separated. But it 
is things and bodies, it is the material channeling of my 
transcendence which disposes me to apprehend it as extended 
and supported by the other transcendences without my getting 
out of myself and without the others getting out of them- 
selves. I apprehend through the world that I form a part of 
“we.” 


This is why my experience of the We-subject in no way 
implies a similar and correlative experience in others; this is 
why also it is so unstable, for it depends on particular organi- 
zations in the midst of the world and it disappears with those 
organizations. In truth, there is in the world a host of for- 
matiom which indicate me an anybody: first of all, all instru- 
mental formations from tools proper to buildings with their 
elevators, their water or gas pipes, their electricity, not to 
means of transportation, shops, etc. Every shop win- 
dow, each plate of glass refers to me my image as an undiffer- 



551 


CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 


entiated transcendence. In addition professional and technical 
relations with others make me known to myself as anybody: 
for the waiter I am any patron, for the ticket collector I am 
any user of the subway. Finally the chance incident which sud- 
denly takes place in front of the pavement of The cafe where I 
am sitting indicates me as an anonymous spectator and as a 
pure “look which makes this incident exist — as an outside. 
Similarly it is the anonymity of the spectator which is indicated 
by the theatrical performance which I am attending or the ex- 
hibition of pictures which I visit. And of course I make 
myself anybody when I try on shoes or uncork a bottle or go 
into an elevator or laugh in the theater. But the experience of 
this undifferentiated transcendence is an iimer and contin- 
gent event which concerns only me. Certain particular circum- 
stances which come from the world can add to my impression 
of being part of the “we.” But in every instance we are deal- 
ing with only a purely subjective impression which engages 
only me. 

(2) The experience of the We-subject can not be primary; 
it can not constitute an original attitude toward others since, 
on the contrary, it must in order to be realized presuppose a 
twofold preliminary recognition of the existence of others. In 
the first place, the manufactured object is such only if it refers 
to the producers who have made it and to rules for its use 


which have been fixed by others. Confronting an inanirnate 
thing which has not been worked on, for which I myself fix 
its mode of use and to which I myself assign a new use (if, 
for example, I use a stone as a hammer) , I have a non-thetic 
consciousness of myself as a person; that is, of my selfness, 
of my own ends, and of my free inventiveness. The rules for 
J^ing, the “methods of employing” manufactured objects are 
both rigid and ideal like taboos and by their essential struc- 
ture put me in the presence of the Other; it is because the 
Other neats me as an undifferentiated transcendence that I 
can realize myself as such. 

, ^ ready exarnple, take those big signs which are above 

UiA ^ station or in a waiting room and which bear 

on “Enhance”; or again the directing hands 

wp nrp which indicate a building or a direction. Here 
hPm 1 hypothetical imperatives. But 

Ofhpr of the imperative clearly allows the 

dre<;Qino V the Other who is speaking and ad-., 

g unself directly to me. It is indeed to me that the 


552 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


printed sentence is directed; it represents in fact an immediate 
communication from the Other to me: I am aimed at. But 
if the Other aims at me, it is in so far as I am an undifferen- 
tiated transcendence. As soon as I avail myself of the opening 
marked “Exit” and go out through it, I am not using it in the 
absolute freedom of my personal projects. I am not constitut- 
ing a tool by means of invention; I do not surpass the pure 
materiality of the thing toward my possibles. But between the 
object and me there has already slipped in a human transcen- 
dence which guides my transcendence. The object is already 
humanized; it signifies “human control.” The “Exit” — con- 
sidered as a pure opening out onto the street — is strictly equiv- 
alent to the “Entrance”; neither its coefficient of adversity nor 
its visible utility designates it as an exit. I do not submit 
to the object itself when I use it as an “Exit”; I adapt my- 
self to the human order. By my very act I recognize the 
Other’s existence; I set up a dialogue with the Other. 

All this Heidegger has said and very well. But the con- 
clusion which he neglects to derive from it is that in order 
for the object to appear as manufactured, it is necessary that 
the Other be first given in some other way. A person who had 
not already experienced the Other would in no way be able 
to distinguish the manufactured object from the pure materi- 
ality of a thing which has not been worked on. Even if he 
were to utilize it according to the method foreseen by the 
manufacturer, he would be reinventing this method and would 
thus realize a free appropriation of a natural thing. To go out 
by the passage marked “Exit” without having read the writing 
or without knowing the language is to be like the Stoic mad- 
man who in broad daylight says, “It is day,” not as the con- 
sequence of an objective establishment but by virtue of inner 
resources of his madness. If therefore the manufactured object 
refers to Others and therebjr to my undifferentiated transcen- 
dence, this is because I already know Others. Thus the experi- 
ence of the We-subject is based on the original experience 
of the Other and can be only a secondary and subordinate ex- 
perience. 

Furthermore, as we have seen, to apprehend oneself as an 
undifferentiated transcendence — that is, at bottom as a pure 
exemplification of the “human species” — is not yet to appre- 
hend oneself as the partial structure of a We-subjecL For 
that, in fact, one must discover oneself as anybody in the 
center of some human stream. Therefore it is necessary to be 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 553, 

surrounded by others. We have seen also ihat the others ^e 
in no way experienced as subjects in this experience, but 
neither are they apprehended as objects.^ They are not posited 
at all. Of course, I proceed on the basis of their factual ex- 
istence in the world and of the perception of their acts. But 
I do not apprehend their facticity or their movements posi- 
tionally; I have a lateral and non-positional consciousness of 
their bodies as correlative with my body, of their acts as un- 
folding in connection with my acts in such a way that I can 
not determine whether it is my acts which give birth to their 
acts or their acts which give birth to mine. A few observations 
will suffice to make clear that the experience of the “We” can 
not enable me originally to know as Others the Others who 
make part of the We. Quite the contrary, it is necessary that 
&st there should be some awareness of what the Other is in 
order for an experience of my relations with Others to be 
realized in the form of the Mitsein. The Mitsein by itself 
would be impossible without a preliminary recognition of what 

the Other is: “I am with .” Very well. But with 

whom? In addition even if this experience were ontologically 
primary, one can not see how one could pass into a radicd 
modification of this experience — going from a totally undif- 
ferentiated transcendence to the experience of particular per- 
sons. If the Other were not given elsewhere, the experience 
of the “We” when broken up would give birth only to the 
apprehension of pure object-instruments in the world circum- 
scribed by my transcendence. 

These few remarks do not claim to exhaust the question 
of the “We.” They aim only at indicating that the experience 
of the We-subject has no value as a metaphysical revelation; it 
depends strictly on the various forms of the for-others and is 
only an empirical enrichment of certain of these forms. It is 
to this fact evidently that we should attribute the extreme 
instability of this experience. It comes and disappears capri- 
ciously, leaving us in the face of others-as-objects or else of 
a They” who look at us. It appears as a provisional appease- 
ment which is constituted at the very heart of the conflict, 
not as a definitive solution of this conflict. We should hope 
in vain for a human “we” in which the intersubjective totality 
would obtain consciousness of itself as a unified subjectivity. 
Such an ideal could be only a dream produced by a passage to 
tne limit and to the absolute on the basis of fragmentary, 
strictly psychological experiences. Furthermore this ideal itself 



554 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

implies the recognition of the conflict of transcendences as 
the original state of being-for-others. 

This fact explains an apparent paradox: since the unity of 
the oppressed class stems from the fact that it is experienced 
as an Us-object in the face of an undifferentiated “They” 
which is the Third or the oppressing class, one might be 
tempted to believe that by a sort of symmetry the oppressing 
class apprehends itself as a We-subject in the face of the 
oppressed class. But the weakness of the oppressmg class lies 
in the fact that although it has at its disposal precise and 
rigorous means for coercion, it is within itself profoundly 
anarchistic. The “bourgeois” is not only defined as a certain 
homo osconomicus disposing of a precise power and privilege 
in the heart of a society of a certain type; he is described in- 
wardly as a consciousness which does not recognize its be- 
longing to a class. His situation, m fact, does not allow him 
to apprehend himself as engaged in an Us-object in commu- 
nity with the other members of the bourgeois class. But on the 
other hand, the very nature of the We-subject implies that it 
is made up of only fleeting experiences without metaphysical 
bearing. The “bourgeois” commonly denies that there are 
classes; he attributes the existence of a proletariat to the ac- 
tion of agitators, to awkward incidents, to injustices which 
can be repaired by particular measures; he afems the ex- 
istence of a solidarity of interests between capital and labor; 
he offers instead of class solidarity a larger solidarity, natural 
solidarity, in which the worker and the employer are integrat- 
ed in a Mitsein which suppresses the conflict. The question 
here is not, as so often said, one of maneuvers or of a stupid 
refusal to see the situation in its true light; rather the member 
of the oppressing class sees the totality of the oppressed class 
confronting him as an objective ensemble of “they-subjects” 
without his correlatively realizing his community of being 
with the other members of the' oppressing class. Tke two ex- 
periences are in no way complementary; in fact one may be 
alone in the face of an oppressed collectivity and still be able 
to grasp it as an object-instrument and apprehend oneself as 
&e internal-negation of this collectivity; i.e., simply as the 
impartial Third. It is only when the oppressed class by rev- 
olution or by a sudden increase of its power posits itself as 
they-who-look-at” in the face of members of the oppressing 
class, it is onlv then that the oppressors experience themselves 



CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH OTHERS 555 

as “Us.” But this will be in fear and shame and as an Us- 
object. 

Thus there is no symmetry between the making proof of 
the Us-object and the experience of the We-subject. The first 
is the revelation of a dimension of real existence and corre- 
sponds to a simple enrichment of the original proof of the for- 
others- The second is a psychological experience realized by an 
historic man immersed in a working universe and in a society 
of a definite economic type. It reveals nothing particular; it is 
a purely subjective Erlebnis. 

It appears therefore that the experience of the “We” 
and the “Us,” although real, is not of a nature to modify the 
results of our prior investigations. As for the Us-object, this 
is directly dependent on the Third — i.e., on my being-for- 
others — and it is constituted on the foundation of my being- 
outside-for-others. And as for the We-subject, this is a psy- 
chological experience which supposes one way or another that 
the Other’s existence as such has been already revealed to us. 
It is therefore useless for human-reality to seek to get out of 
this dilemma: one must either transcend the Other or allow 
oneself to be transcended by him. The essence of the relations 
between consciousnesses is not the Mitsein; it is conflict. 

At the end of this long description of the relations of the 
for-itself with others we have then achieved this certainty: 
the for-itself is not only a being which arises as the nihilation 
of the in-itself which it is and the internal negation of the 
in-itself which it is not. This nihilating flight is entirely re- 
appfehended by the in-itself and fixed in in-itself as soon as 
the Other appears. The for-itself when alone transcends the 
world; it is the nothing by which there are things. The Other 
by rising up confers on the for-itself a being-in-itself-in-the- 
mdst-of-the-world as a thing among things. This petrifaction 
in in-itself by the Other’s look is the profound meaning of the 
myth of Medusa. 

We have therefore advanced in our pursuit: we wanted to 
determine the original relation of the for-itself to the in-itself. 
We learned first that the for-itself was the nihilation and the 
radical negation of the in-itself; at present we establish that it 
IS also by the sole fact of meeting with the Other and with- 

— totally in-itself, present in the midst 
0 the m-itself. But this second aspect of the for-itself repre- 
sents Its outside; the for-itself by nature is the being which 
can not coincide with its being-in-itself. 



556 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


These remarks can serve as the basis for a general theory 
of being, which is the goal toward which we are working. 
Nevertheless it is stUl too soon for us to attempt this theory. 
Actually it is not sufficient to describe the for-itself as simply 
projecting its possibilities beyond being-in-itself. This pro- 
jecting ofTts possibilities does not statically determine the con- 
f guration of the world; it changes the world at every instant. 
If we read Heidegger, for example, we are struck, from this 
point of view, with the inadequacy of his hermeneutic de- 
scriptions. Adopting his terminology, we shall say that he has 
described the Dasein as the existent which surpasses existents 
toward their being. And being, here, signifies the meaning or 
the mode of being of the existent. It is true that the for-itself 
is the being by which existents reveal their mode of being. 
But Heidegger passes over in silence the fact that the for- 
itself is not only the being which constitutes an ontology 
of existents but ffiat it is also the being by whom ontic modi- 
fications supervene for the existent qua existent. This perpet- 
ual possibility of acting — that is, of modifying the in-itself in 
its ontic materiality, in its “flesh” — ^must evidently be con- 
sidered as an essential characteristic of the for-itself. As such 
this possibility must find its foundation in an original relation 
of the for-itself to the in-itself, a relation which we have not 
yet brought to light. What does it mean to act? Why does 
the for-itself act? How can it act? Such are the questions to 
which we must reply at present. We have all the elements for 
a reply: nihilation, facticity and the body, being-for-others, 
the peculiar nature of the in-itself. We must question them 
once more. 



PART FOUR 


Having, Doing, and Being 


“Havikg,” “doing,” and “being”i are the cardinal categories 
of human reality. Under them are subsumed all types of 
human conduct. Knowing, for example, is a modality of 
having. These categories are not without connection with one - 
another, and several writers have emphasized these ties. 
Denis de Rougemont is throwing light on this kind of rela- 
tion when he writes in his article on Don Juan, “He was not 
capable of having.” Again a similar connection is indicated 
when a moral agent is represented as doing in order to “do . 
himself” and “doing himself” in order to be. 

However since the reaction against the doctrine of sub- 
stance has won out in modern philosophy, the majority of 
thinkers have attempted to do on the ground of human con- 
duct what their predecessors have done in physics — ^to re- 
place substance by simple motion. For a long time the aim of 
ethics was to provide man with a way of being. This was 
the meaning of Stoic morality or of Spinoza’s Ethics. But 
if the being of man is to be reabsorbed in the succession 
of his acts, then the purpose of ethics will no longer be to 
raise man to a higher ontological dignity. In this sense the 

faire, etre. It is difficult to know how to translate faire since 
artre gives to it all of the twofold significance of doing and making 
w ch the word carries in French. On the whole “doing’* seems closer, 
especially since such expressions as “to do a book” or “to do a play” 
carry the same double meaning and make sense in English even though 
Uiey are admittedly awkward. 


557 



558 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


Kantian morality is the first great ethical system which sub- 
stitutes doing for being as the supreme value of action. The 
heroes of UEspoir are for the most part on the level of 
doing, and Malraux shows us the conflict between the old 
Spanish democrats who still try to be and the Communists 
whose morality results in a series of precise, detailed obliga- 
tions, each of these obligations aiming at a particular doing. 
Who is right? Is the supreme value of human activity a 
doing or a being? And whichever solution we adopt, what 
is to become of having? Ontology should be able to inform us 
concerning this problem; moreover it is one of ontology’s 
essential tasks if the for-itself is the being which is defined by 
action. Therefore we must not bring this work to a close with- 
out giving a broad outline for the study of action in general 
and of the essential relations of doing, of being, and of 
having. 



CHAPTER ONE 


Being and Doing: Freedom 


I. FREEDOM: THE FIRST CONDITION 
OF ACTION 

It is strange that philosophers have been able to argtie end- 
lessly about determinism and free will, to cite examples in 
favor of one or the other thesis without ever attempting first 
to make explicit the structures contained in the very idea of 
action. The concept of an act contains, in fact, numerous,^ 
subordinate notions which we shall have to organize and ar- 
range in a hierarchy: to act is to modify the shape of the 
world; it is to arrange means in view of an end; it is to pro- 
duce an organized instrumental complex such that by a series 
of concatenations and connections the m.odification effected 
on one of the links causes modifications throughout the* 
whole series and finally produces an anticipated result. But 
this is not what is important for us here. We should observe 
first that an action is on principle intentional. The careless 
smoker who has through negligence caused the explosion of a 
powder magazine has not acted. On the other hand the 
worker who is charged with dynamiting a quarry and who 
obeys the given orders has acted when he has produced the 
expected explosion; he knew what he was doing or, if you 
intentionally realized a conscious project. 

mean, of course, that one must foresee all 
consequences of his act. The emperor Constantine, when 

559 



560 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


he established himself at Byzantium, did not foresee that he 
would create a center of Greek culture and language, the 
appearance of which would ultimately provoke a schism in 
the Christian Church and which would contribute to weaken- 
ing the Roman Empire. Yet he performed an act just in so 
far as he realized his project of creating a new residence for 
emperors in the Orient. Equating the result with the intention 
is here sufficient for us to be able to speak of action. But if 
this is the case, we establish that the action necessarily im- 
plies as its condition the recognition of a “desideratuna”; that 
is, of an objective lack or again of a negatite. The intention 
of providing a rival for Rome can come to Constantine only 
through the apprehension of an objective lack; Rome lacks a 
counterweight; to this still profoundly pagan city ought to be 
opposed a Christian city which at the moment is missing. 
Creating Constantinople is understood as an act only if first 
the conception of a new city has preceded the action itself or 
at least if this conception serves as an organizing theme for 
all later steps. But this conception can not be the pure repre- 
sentation of the city as possible. It apprehends the city in its 
essential characteristic, which is to be a desirable and not yet 
realized possible. 

This means that from the moment of the first conception 
of the act, consciousness has been able to withdraw itself from 
the full world of which it is consciousness and to leave the 
level of being in order frankly to approach that of non-being. 
Consciousness, in so far as it is considered exclusively in its 
being, is perpetually referred from being to being and can not 
find in being any motive for revealing non-being. The im- 
perial system with Rome as its capital functions positively and 
in a certain real way which can be easily discovered. Will 
someone say that the taxes are collected badly, that Rome- is- 
not secure from invasions, that it does not have the geographi- 
cal location which is suitable for the capital of a Mediterra- 
nean empire which is threatened by barbarians, that its corrupt 
morals makt the spread of the Christian religion difficult? 
How can anyone fail to see that all these considerations are 
negative; that is, that they aim at what is not, not at what is. 
To say that sixty per cent of the anticipated taxes have been 
collected can pass, if need be, for a positive appreciation 
of the situation such as it is. To say that they are badly col- 
lected is to consider the situation across a situation which is 
posited as an absolute end but which precisely is not. To say 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 561 

that the corrupt morals at Rome hinder the spread_ of Chris- 
Uanity is not to consider this diffusion for what it is; that is, 
for a propagation at a rate which the reports of the clergy can 
enable us to determine. It is to posit the diffusion m itself 
as insufficient; that is, as suffering from a secret nothingness. 
But it appears as such only if it is surpassed toward a limiting- 
situation posited a priori as a value (for example, to- 
ward a certain rate of religious conversions, toward a certam 
mass morality). This limiting-situation can not be conceived 
in, terms of the simple consideration of the real state of 
things; for the most beautiful girl in the world can offer only 
what she has, and in the same way the most' miserable situa- 
tion can by itself be designated only as it is without any refer- 
ence to an ideal nothingness. 

In so far as man is immersed in the historical situation, he 
does not even succeed in conceiving of the failures and lacks 
in a political organization or determined economy; this is not, 
as is stupidly said, because he “is ' accustomed to it,” but be- 
cause he apprehends it in its plenitude of being and because 
he can not even imagine that he can exist in it otherwise. For 
it is necessary here to reverse common opinion and on the 
basis of what it is not, to acknowledge the harshness of a 
situation or the suffering which it imposes, both of which 
are motives for conceiving of another state of affairs in which 
things would be better for everybody. It is on the day that we 
can conceive of a different state of affairs that a new light 
falls on our troubles and our suffering and that we decide 
that these are unbearable. A worker in 1830 is capable of re- 
volting if his salary is lowered, for he easily conceives of a 
situation in which his wretched standard of living would be 
not as low as the one which is about to be imposed on him. 
k/ represent his sufferings to himself as unbear- 

able; he adapts himself to them not through resignation but 
ecause he lacks the education and reflection necessary for 
mm to conceive of a social state, in which these sufferings 
would not exist. Consequently he does not act. Masters of 
yon following a riot, the workers at Croix-Rousse do not 

wilderjri^^^ ^ ^ victory; they return home be- 

coming ffie regular army has no trouble in over- 
"habitir w misfortunes do not appear to them 

constitute 

are not se^ detached; they 

in the clear hght of day, and consequently they 



562 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


are integrated by the worker with his being. He suffers with- 
out considering his suffering and without conferring value 
upon it. To suffer and to be are one and the same for him. 
His suffering is the pure affective tenor of his non-positional 
consciousness, but he does not contemplate it. Therefore this 
suffering can not be in itself a motive- for his acts. Quite the 
contrary, it is after he has formed the project of changing 
the situation that it will appear intolerable to him. This means 
that he will have had to give himself room, to withdraw in 
relation to it, and will have to have effected a double nihila- 
tion: on the one hand, he must posit an ideal state of affairs as 
a pure present nothingness; on the other hand, he must posit 
the actual situation as nothingness in relation to this state of 
affairs. He will have to conceive of a happiness attached to 
his class as a pure possible — that is, presently as a certain 
nothingness — and on the other hand, he will return to the 
present situation in order to illuminate it in the light of this 
nothingness and in order to nihilate it in turn by declaring: 
“I am not happy.” 

Two important consequences result. (1) No factual state 
whatever it may be (the political and economic structure of 
society, the psychological “state,” etc.) is capable by itself of 
motivating any act whatsoever. For an act is a projection of 
the for-itself toward what is not, and what is can in no way 
determine by itself what is not. (2) No factual state can deter- 
mine consciousness to apprehend it as a negatite or as a lack. 
Better yet no factual state can determine consciousness to de- 
fine it and to circumscribe it since, as we have seen, Spinoza’s 
statement, “Omnis deterrainatio est negatio,” remains pro- 
foundly true. Now every action has for its express condition 
not only the discovery of a state of affairs as “lacking in 

■ ,” Le., as a negatite — but also, and before all else, the 

constitution of the state of things under consideration into 
an isolated system. There is a factual state — ^satisfying or not 
— only by means of the nihilating power of the for-itself. 
But this power of nihilation can not be limited to realizing a 

“Tr. In this and following sections Sartre makes a sharp distinction 
between motif and mobile. The English word “motive” expresses sufficiently 
adequately the French mobile, which refers to an mner subjective fact or 
attitude. For motif there is no true equivalent. Since it refers to an external 
fact or situation, I am translating it by “cause.” The reader must remember, 
however, that this carries with it no idea of determinism. Sartre emphatically 
demes the existence of any cause in the usual determimstic sense. 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


5^ 


simple withdrawal in relation to the world. In fact in so far 
as consciousness is “invested” by being, in so far as it 
simply suffers what is, it must be included in being. It is the 
organized form — worker-finding-his-suffering-natural — ^which 
must be surmounted and denied in order for it to be able to 
form the object of a revealing contemplation. This means 
evidently that it is by a pure wrenching away from himself 
and the world that the worker can posit his suffering as un- 
bearable suffering and consequently can make of it the motive 
for his revolutionary action. This implies for consciousness the 
permanent possibility of effecting a rupture with its own past, 
of wrenching itself away from its past so as to be able to con- 
sider it in the light of a non-being and so as to be able to 
confer on it the meaning which it has in terms of the project 
of a meaning which it does not have. Under no circumstances 
can the past in any way by itself produce an act; that is, the 
positing of an end which turns back upon itself so as to illumi- 
nate it. This is what Hegel caught sight of when he wrote 
that “the mind is the negative,” although he seems not to have 
remembered this when he came to presenting his own theory 
of action and of freedom. In fact as soon as one attributes to 
consciousness this negative power with respect to the world 
and itself, as soon as the nihilation forms an integral part of 
the positing of an end, we must recognize that the indispens- 
able and fundamental condition of all action is the freedom 
of the acting being. 

Thus at the outset we can see what is lacking in those 
tedious discussions between determinists and the proponents 
of free will. The latter are concerned to find cases of deci- 
sion for which there exists no prior cause, or deliberations 
concerning two opposed acts which are equally possible and 
possess causes (and motives) of exactly the same weight. 
To which the determinists may easily reply that there is no 
action without a cause and that the most insignificant ges- 
ture (raising the right hand rather than the left hand, etc.) 
refers to causes and motives which confer its meaning upon 
It. Indeed the case could not be otherwise since every action 
must be intentional; each action must, in fact, have an^end, 
and the end in turn is referred to a cause. Such indeed is 
the unity of the three temporal ekstases; the end or temporal- 
ization of my future implies a cause (or motive); that is. 
It points toward my past, and the present is the upsurge of 
the act. _ To speak of an act without a cause is to speak of 


564 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

an act which would lack the intentional structure of every 
act; and the proponents of free will by searching for it on 
the level of the act which is in the process of being performed 
can only end up by rendering the act absurd: But the deter- « 
minists in tinrn are weighting the scale by stopping their 
investigation with the mere designation of the cause and 
motive. The essential question in fact lies beyond the com- 
plex organization “cause-intention-act-end”; indeed we ought 
to ask how a cause (or motive) can be constituted as 
such. 

Now we have just seen that if there is no act without 
a cause, this is not in the sense that we can say that there is 
no phenomenon without a cause. In order to be a cause, the 
cause must be experienced as such. Of course this. does not 
mean that it is to be thematically conceived and made explic- 
it as in the case of deliberation. But at the very least it 
means that the for-itself must confer on it its value as cause 
or motive. And, as we have seen, this constitution of the 
cause as such can not refer to another real and positive ex- 
istence; that is, to a prior cause. For otherwise the very nature 
of the act as engaged intentionally in non-being would 
disappear. The motive is understood only by the end; that is, 
by the non-existent. It is therefore in itself a negatite. If I 
accept a niggardly salary it is doubtless because of fear; 
and fear is a motive. But it is fear of dying from starvation; 
that is, this fear has meaning only outside itself in an end 
ideally posited, which is the preservation of a life which I 
.apprehend as “in danger.” And this fear is understood in 
turn only in relation to the value which I implicitly give to 
this life; that is, it is referred to that hierarchal system of 
ideal objects which are values. Thus the motive makes it- 
self understood as what it is by means of the ensemble of 
beings which “are not,” by ideal existences, and by the fu- 
ture. Just as the future turns back upon the present and 
the past in order to elucidate them, so it is the ensemble of 
my projects which turns back in order to confer upon the 
motive its structure as a motive. It is only because I escape 
the m-itself by nihilating myself toward my possibilities that 
this in-itseif can take on value as cause or motive. Causes and 
motives have meaning only inside a projected ensemble 
which is precisely an ensemble of non-existents. And this 
ensemble is ultimately myself as transcendence; it is Me 
in, so fair as I have to be myself outside of' myself. 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 565 

If we recall the principle which we established earlier — 
namely that it is -the apprehension of a revolution as pos- 
sible which gives to the workman’s suffering its value^ as a 
motive — we must thereby conclude that it is by fleeing a 
situation toward our possibility of changing it that we organ- 
ize this situation into complexes of causes and motives. The 
nihilation by which we achieve a withdrawal in relation to 
the situation is the same as the ekstasis by which we project 
ourselves toward a modification of this situation. The result 
is that it is in fact impossible to find an act without a motive 
but that this does not mean that we must conclude that 
the motive causes the act; the motive is an integral part of 
the act. For as the resolute project toward a change is not 
distinct from the act, the motive, the act, and the end are all 
constituted in a single upsurge. Each of these three structures 
claims the two others as its meaning. But the organized to- 
tality of the three is no longer explained by any particular 
structure, and its upsurge as the pure temporalizing nihilation 
of the in-itself is one with freedom. It is the act which de- 
cides its ends and its motives, and the act is the expression 
of freedom. 

We can not, however, stop with these superficial consider- 
ations; if the fundamental condition of the act is freedom, 
we must attempt to describe this freedom more precisely. 
But at the start we encounter a great difficulty. Ordinarily; 
to describe something is a process of making explicit by aim- 
ing at the structures of a particular essence. Now freedom has 
no essence. It is not subject to any logical necessity; we must 
say of. it what Heidegger said of the Dasein in general: 
“In it existence precedes and commands essence.” Freedom 
makes itself an act, and we ordinarily attain it across the 
act which it organizes with the causes, motives, and ends 
which the act implies. But precisely because this act has an 
essence, it appears to us as constituted; if we wish to reach 
the constitutive power, we must abandon any hope of finding 
it an essence. That would in fact demand a new constitutive 
power and so on to infinity. How then are we to describe 
an existence which perpetually makes itself and which refuses 
to be confined in a definition? The very use of the term 
“freedom” is dangerous if it is to imply that the word refers 
to a concept, as words ordinarily do. Indefinable and un- 
namable, is freedom also indescribable? 

Earlier when we wanted to describe nothingness and the 



566 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


being of the phenomenon, we encountered comparable diffi- 
culties. Yet they did not deter us. This is because there 
can be descriptions which do not aim at the essence but 
at the existent itself in its particularity. To be sure, I could 
not describe a freedom which would be common to both the 
Other and myself; I could not therefore contemplate an es- 
sence of freedom. On the contrary, it is freedom which is the 
foundation of all essences since man reveals intra-mundane 
essences by surpassing the world toward his own possibilities. 
But actually the question is of my freedom. Similarly when I 
described consciousness, I could not discuss a nature common 
to certain individuals but only my particular consciousness, 
which like my freedom is beyond essence, or — as we have 
shown with considerable repetition — for which to be is to have 
been. I discussed this consciousness so as to touch it in its very 
existence as a particular experience — the cogito. Husserl' and 
Descartes, as Gaston Berger has shown, demand that the 
cogito release to them a truth as essence: with Descartes we 
achieve the connection of two simple natures; with Husserl 
we grasp the eidetic structure of consciousness.® But if in con- 
sciousness its existence must precede its essence, then both 
Descartes and Husserl have committed an error. What we can 
demand from the cogito is only that it discover for us a 
factual necessity. It is also to the cogito that we appeal 
in order to determine freedom as the freedom which is ours, 
as a pure factual necessity; that is, as a contingent existent 
but one which I am not able not to experience. I am indeed an 
existent who learns his freedom through his acts, but I am also 
an existent whose individual and unique existence temporalizes 
itself as freedom. As such 1 am necessarily a consciousness 
(of) freedom since nothing exists in consciousness except as 
the non-thetic consciousness of existing. Thus my freedom is 
perpetually in question in my being; it is not a quality added 
on or a property of my nature. It is very exactly the stuff 
of my .being; and as in my being, my being is in question, I 
must necessarily possess a certain comprehension of freedom. 
It is this comprehension which we intend at present to make 
explicit. 

In our attempt to reach to the heart of freedom we may 
be helped by the few observations which we have made on 
the subject in the course of this work and which we must 
summarize here. In the first chapter we established the fact 

® Gaston Berger. Le Cogito chez Husserl et chez Descartes. 1940. 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


567 


that if negation comes into the world through human-reality, 
the latter must be a being who can realize a nihilating 
rupture with the world and with himself; and we established 
that the permanent possibility of this rupture is the same 
as freedom. But on the other hand, we stated that this per- 
manent possibility of nihil ating what I am in the form of 
“having-been” implies for man a particular type of existence. 
We were able then to determine by means of analyses 
like that of bad faith that human reality is its own nothingness. 
For the for-itself, to be is to nihilate the in-itself which 
it is. Under these conditions freedom can be nothing other 
than Ais nihilation. It is through this that the for-itself 
escapes its being as its essence; it is through this that the for- 
itself is always something other than what can be said of it. 
For in the final analysis the For-itself is the one which 
escapes this very denomination, the one which is already be- 
yond the name which is given to it, beyond the property 
which is recognized in it. To say that the for-itself has to be 
what it is, to say that it is what it is not while not being 
what it is, to say that in it existence precedes and conditions 
essence or inversely according to Hegel, that for it “Wesen 
ist was gewesen ist” — all this is to say one and the same thing: 
to be aware that man is free. Indeed by the sole fact that I 
am conscious of the causes which inspire my action, these 
causes are already transcendent objects for my consciousness; 
they are outside. In vain shall I seek to catch hold of them; 
I escape them by my very existence. I am condemned to exist 
forever beyond my essence, beyond the causes and motives 
of my act. I am condemned to be free. This means that no 
limits to my freedom can be found except freedom itself or, 
if you prefer, that we are not free to cease being free. To the 
extent that the for-itself wishes to hide its own nothingness 
from itself and to incorporate the in-itself as its true mode of 
being, it is trying also to hide its freedom from itself. 

- The ultimate meaning of determinism is to establish with- - 
,in us an unbroken continuity of existence in itself. The mo- 
tive conceived as a psychic fact — i.e., as a full and given 
reality — is, in the deterministic view, articulated without 
any break with the decision and the act, both of which are 
equally conceived as psychic givens. The in-itself has got hold 
of all these “data”; the motive provokes the act as the physical 
causes its effect; everything is real, ever3^hing is full. Thus the 
refusal of freedom can be conceived only as an attempt to 



568 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


apprehend oneself as being-in-itself; it amounts to the same 
thin g. Human reality may be defined as a being such 
that in its being its freedom is at stake because human reality 
perpetually tries to refuse to recognize its freedom. Psycholog- 
ically in each one of us this amounts to trying to take the 
causes and motives as things. We try to confer permanence 
upon them. We attempt to hide from ourselves that their 
nature and their weight depend each moment on the mean- 
ing which I give to them; we take them for constants. This 
amounts to considering the meaning which I gave to them 
just now or yesterday — which is irremediable because it 
is past — and extrapolating from it a character fixed still in 
the present. I attempt to persuade myself that the cause 
is as it was. Thus it would pass whole and untouched from 
my past consciousness to my present consciousness. It would 
inhabit my consciousness. This amounts to trying to give 
an essence to the for-itself. In the same way people will 
posit ends as transcendences, which is not an error. But in- 
stead of seeing that the transcendences there posited are 
maintained in their being by my own transcendence, people 
will assume that I encounter them upon my surging up in 
the world; they come from God, from nature, from “my” 
nature, from society. These ends ready made and pre- 
human will therefore define the meaning of my act even be- 
fore I conceive it, just as causes as pure psychic givens wili 
produce it without my even being aware of them. 

Cause, act, and end constitute a continuum, a plenum. 
These abortive attempts to stifle freedom under the weight 
of being (they collapse with the sudden upsurge of anguish 
before freedom) show sufficiently that freedom in its founda- 
tion coincides with the nothingness which is at the heart 
of man. Human-reality is free because it is not enough. 
It is free because it is perpetually wrenched away from itself 
and because it has been separated by a nothingness from 
what it is and from what it will be. It is free, finally, be- 
cause its present being is itself a nothingness in the form of 
the “reflection-reflecting.” Man is free because he is not him- 
self but presence to himself. The being which is what it is 
can not be free. Freedom is precisely the nothingness which 
is made-to-be at the heart of man and which forces human- 
reality to make itself instead of to be. As we have seen, for 
human reality, to be is to choose oneself; nothing comes to 
It either from the outside or from within which it can re- 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 569 

ceive or accept. Without any help whatsoever, it is entirely 
abandoned to the intolerable necessity of making itself be — 
down to the slightest detail. -Thus freedom is not a being; 
it is the being of man— i.e., his nothingness of being. 
If we start by conceiving of man as a plenum, it is absurd 
to try to find in him afterwards moments or psychic regions 
in which he would be free. As well look for emptiness in a 
container which one has filled beforehand up to the brirnl 
Man can not be sometimes slave and sometimes free; he is 
wholly and forever free or he is not free at all. 

These observations can lead us, if we know how to use 
them, to new discoveries. They will enable us first to bring 
to light the relations between freedom and what we call the 
“will.” There is a fairly common tendency to seek to iden- 
tify free acts with voluntary acts and to restrict the determin- 
istic explanation to the world of the passions. In short the 
point of view of Descartes. The Cartesian will is free, but 
there are “passions of the soul.” Again Descartes will attempt 
a physiological interpretation of these passions. Later there 
will be an attempt to instate a purely psychological determin- 
ism. Intellectualistic analyses such as Proust, for example, 
attempts with respect to jealousy or snobbery can serve as 
illustrations for this concept of the passional “mechanism.” 
In this case it would be necessary to conceive of man as 
simultaneously free and determined, and the essential prob- 
lem would be that of the relations between this uncondi- 
tioned freedom and the determined processes of the psychic 
life: how will it master the passions, how will it utilize 
them for its own benefit? A wisdom which comes from 
ancient times — the wisdom of the Stoics — ^will teach us to 
come to terms with these passions so as to master them; in 
short it will counsel us how to conduct ourselves with regard 
to affectivity as man does with respect to nature in general 
when he obeys it in order better to control it. Human real- 
ity therefore appears as a free power besieged by an ensemble 
of determined processes. One will distinguish wholly free 
acts, determined processes over which the free will has power, 
and processes which on principle escape the human-will. 

It^ is clear that we shall not be able to accept such a con- 
ception. But let us try better to understand the reasons for 
our refusal. There is one objection which is obvious and 
which we shall not waste time in developing; this is that such 
a trenchant duality is inconceivable at the heart of the psy- 



'570 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


chic unity. How in fact could we conceive of a being which 
could be one and which nevertheless on the one hand would 
be constituted as a series of facts determined by one another — 
hence existents in exteriority — and which on the other hand 
would be constituted as a spontaneity determining itself to 
be and revealing only itself? A priori this spontaneity 
would be capable of no action on a determinism already 
constituted. On what could it act? On the object itself (the 
present psychic fact)? But how could it modify an in-itself 
which by definition is and can be only what it is? On the 
actual law of the process? This is self-contradictory. On the 
antecedents of the process? But it amounts to the same 
thing whether we act on the present psychic fact in order 
to modify it in itself or act upon it in order to modify its 
consequences. And in each case we encounter the same im- 
possibility which we pointed out earlier. Moreover, what 
instrument would this spontaneity have at its disposal? 
If the hand can clasp, it is because it can be clasped. Sponta- 
neity, since by definition it is beyond reach, can not in turn 
reach; it can produce only itself. And if it could dispose of 
a special instrument, it would then be necessary to con- 
ceive of this as of an intermediary nature between free will 
and determined passions — ^which is not admissible. For dif- 
ferent reasons the passions could get no hold upon the will. 
Indeed it is impossible for a determined process to act upon 
a spontaneity, exactly as it is impossible for objects to act 
upon consciousness. Thus any synthesis of two types of exis- 
tents is impossible; they are not homogeneous; they will re- 
main each one in its incommunicable solitude. The only 
bond which a nihilating spontaneity could maintain with 
mechanical processes would be the fact that it produces 
itself by an internal negation directed toward these existents. 
But then the spontaneity will exist precisely only in so far 
as it denies concerning itself that it is these passions. Hence- 
forth the ensemble of the determined irados will of neces- 
sity be apprehended by spontaneity as a pure transcendent; 
&at is, as what is necessarily outside, as what is not it.'* This 
internal negation would therefore have for its effect only the 
dissolution of the Trados in the world, and the irados would 
exist as some sort of object in the midst of the world for a 
free spontaneity which ^ would be simultaneously will and 
consciousness. This discussion shows that two solutions and 

*Tr. l.e., is not spontaneity. 



BEING AND DOING; FREEDOM 571 

only two are possible: either man is wholly determined 
(which is inadmissible, especially because a determned con- 
sciousness — i.e., a consciousness externally motivated — be- 
comes itself pure exteriority and ceases to be consciousness) 
or else man is wholly free. 

But these observations are still not our primary concern. 
They have only a negative bearing. The study of the will 
should, on the contrary, enable us to advance further in our 
understanding of freedom. And this is why the fact which 
strikes us first is that if the will is to be autonomous, then 
it is impossible for us to consider it as a given psychic fact; 
that is, in-itself. It can not belong to the category defined by 
the psychologist as “states of consciousness.” Here as every- 
where else we assert that the state of consciousness is a pure 
idol of a positive psychology. If the will is to be freedom, 
then it is of necessity negativity and the power. of nihilation. 
But then we no longer can see why autonomy should be pre- 
served for the will. In fact it is hard to conceive, of those 
holes of nihilation which would be the volitions and 
which would surge up in the otherwise dense and full web 
of the passions and of the urdOos in general. If the will 
is nihilation, then the ensemble of the psychic must likewise 
be nihilation. Moreover — and we shall soon return to this 
point — ^where do we get the idea that the “fact” of passion 
or that pure, simple desire is not nihilating? Is not passion 
first a project and an enterprise? Does it not exactly posit 
a state of affairs as intolerable? And is it not thereby forced 
to effect a withdrawal in relation to this state of affairs and 
to nihilate it by isolating it and by considering it in the 
light of an end — i.e., of a non-being? And does not passion 
have its own ends which are recognized precisely at the 
same moment at which it posits them as non-existent? And 
if nihilation is precisely the being of freedom, how can we 

refuse autonomy to the passions in order to grant it to the 
will? 

But this is not all; the will, far from being the unique or 
at least the privileged manifestation of freedom, actually — 
hke every event of the for-itself — must presuppose the 
foundation of an original freedom in order to be able to con- 
stitute itself as will. The will in fact is posited as a reflective 
decision in relation to certain ends. But it does not create 
these ends. It is rather a mode of being in relation to them: 
It decrees that the pursuit of these ends will be reflective and 



572 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


deliberative. Passion can posit the same ends. For example, 
if I am threatened, I can run away at top speed because of 
my fear of dying. This passional fact nevertheless posits im- 
plicitly as a supreme end the value of life. Another person 
in the same situation will, on the contrary, understand that 
he must remain at his post even if resistance at first appears 
more dangerous than flight; he “will stand firm.” But 
his goal, although better understood and explicitly posited, 
remains the same as in the case of the emotional reaction. 
It is simply that the methods of attaining it are more clearly 
conceived; certain of them are rejected as dubious or ineffi- 
cacious, others are more solidly organized. The difference 
here depends on the choice of means and on the degree of 
reflection and of making explicit, not on the end. Yet the 
one who flees is said to be “passionate,” and we reserve the 
term “voluntary” for the man who resists. Therefore the 
question is of a difference of subjective attitude in relation 
to a transcendent end. But if we wish to avoid the error which 
we denounced earlier and not consider these transcendent 
ends as pre-human and as an a priori limit to our transcen- 
dence, then we are indeed compelled to recognize that they 
are the temporalizing projection of our freedom. Human 
reality can not receive its ends, as we^have seen, either from 
outside or from a so-called inner “nature.” It chooses them 
and by this very choice confers upon them a transcendent 
existence as the external limit of its projects. From this 
point of view — and if it is understood that the existence of 
the Dasein precedes and commands its essence — ^human real- 
ity in and through its very upsurge decides to define its own 
being by its ends. It is therefore the positing of my ultimate 
ends which characterizes my being and which is identical 
with the sudden thrust of the freedom which is mine. And 
this thrust is an existence; it has nothing to do with an 
essence or with a property of a being which would be engen- 
dered conjointly with an idea. 

Thus since freedom is identical with my existence, it is 
the foundation of ends which I shall attempt to attain either 
_ths will or by passionate efforts. Therefore it can not be 
limited to voluntary acts. Volitions, on the contrary, like 
passions are certain subjective attitudes by which we attempt 
to attain the ends posited by original freedom. By original 
freedom, of course, we should not understand a freedom 
which would be prior to the voluntary or passionate act but 



573 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 

rather a foundation which is strictly contemporary with the 
will or the passion and which these manifest, each in its own 
way. Neither should we oppose freedom to the will or to 
passion as the “profound self’ of Bergson is opposed to the 
superficial self; the for-itself is wholly selfness and can hot 
have a “profound self,” unless by this we mean certain tran- 
scendent structures of the psyche. Freedom is nothing but the 
existence of our will or of our passions in so far as this exis- 
tence is the nihilation of facticity; that is, the existence of a 
being which is its being in the mode of having to be it. We 
shall return to this point. In any case let us remember that the 
will is determined within the compass of motives and ends 
already posited by the for-itself in a transcendent projection 
of itself toward its possibles. If this were not so, how could 
we understand deliberation, which is an evaluation of means 
in relation to already existing ends? 

^If these ends are already posited, then what remains to 
be decided at each moment is the way in which I shall con- 
duct myself with respect to them; in other words, the attitude 
which I shall assume. Shall I act by volition or by passion? 
Who -can decide except me? In fact, if we admit that cir- 
cumstances decide for me (for example, I can act "by volition 
when faced with a minor danger but if the peril increases, I 
shall fall into passion), we thereby suppress all freedom. It 
would indeed be absurd to declare that the will is autonomous 
when it appears but that external circumstances strictly deter- 
mine the moment of its appearance. But, on the other hand, 
how can it be maintained that a will which does not yet exist 
can suddenly decide to shatter the chain of the passions and 
suddenly stand forth on the fragments of these chains? Such a 
conception would lead us to consider the will as a power 
which sometimes would manifest itself to consciousness and at 
other times would remain hidden, but which would in any 
case possess the permanence and the existence “in-itself” 
of a property. This is precisely what is inadmissible. It is, 
however, certain that common opinion conceives of the 
moral life as a struggle between a will-thing and passion-sub- 
stances. There is here a sort of psychological Manichaeism 
which is absolutely insupportable. 

Acmalj.y it is not enough to will; it is necessary to will to 
will. Take, for example, a given situation I can react to it' 
emotionally. We have shown elsewhere that emotion is not a 



574 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

physiological tempest;® it is a reply adapted to the situation; 
it is a type of conduct, the meaning and form of which are 
the object of an intention of consciousness which aims at 
attaining a particular end by particular means. In fear, fainting 
and cataplexie® aim at suppressing the danger by suppressing 
the consciousness of the danger. There is an intention of 
losing consciousness in order to do away with the formidable 
world in which consciousness is engaged and which comes 
into being through consciousness. Therefore we have to do 
with magical behavior provoking the symbolic satisfactions .of 
our desires and revealing by the same stroke a magical stratum 
of the world. In contrast to this conduct voluntary and ra- 
tional conduct will consider the situation scientifically, will 
reject the magical, and will apply itself to realizing deter- 
mined series and instrumental complexes which will enable us 
to resolve the problems. It will organize a system of means by 
taking its stand on instrumental determinism. Suddenly it will 
reveal a technical world; that is, a world in which each in- 
strumental-complex refers to another larger complex and so 
on. But what will make me decide to choose the magical 
aspect or the technical aspect of the world? It can not be the 
world itself, for this in order to be manifested waits to be 
discovered. Therefore it is necessary that the for-itself in its 
project must choose being the one by whom the world is re- 
vealed as magical or rational; that is, the for-itself must as a 
free project of itself give to itself magical or rational exis- 
tence. It is responsible for either one, for the for-itself can 
be only if it has chosen itself. Therefore the for-itself appeara 
as the free foundation of its emotions as of its volitions. My 
fear is free and manifests my freedom; I have put all my 
freedom into my fear, and I have chosen myself as fearful in 
this or that circumstance. Under other circumstances I shall 
exist as deliberate and courageous, and I shall have put all 
my freedom into my courage. In relation to freedom there is 
no privileged psychic phenomenon. All my “modes of being” 
manifest freedom equally since they are all ways of being my 
own nothingness. 

This will be even more apparent in the - description 
of what we called the “causes and motives” of action. We 

^Esqulsse d’une" thSorie des Emotions. Herm ann , 1939 . 

® Tr. A word invented by Preyer to refer to a sudden inhibiting numbness 
produced by any shock. 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


575 


have outlined that description in the preceding pages; at 
present it will be well to return to it and take it up again in 
more precise terms. Did we not say indeed that passion is the 
motive of the act — or again that the passional act is that which 
has passion for its motive? And does not the will appear as 
the decision which follows deliberation concerning causes 
and motives? What then is a cause? What is a motive? 

Generally by cause we mean the reason for the act; that 
is, the ensemble of rational considerations which justify it. 
If the government decides on a conversion of Government 
bonds, it will give the .causes for its act: the lessening of the 
national debt, the rehabilitation of the Treasury. Similarly it is 
by causes that historians are accustomed to explain the acts- of 
ministers or monarchs; they will seek the causes for a declara- 
tion of war: the occasion is propitious, the attacked country is 
disorganized because of internal troubles; it is time to put an 
end to an economic conflict which is in danger of lasting 
interminably. If Clovis is converted to Catholicism, then inas- 
much as so many barbarian kings are Arians, it is because 
Clovis sees an opportunity of getting into the good graces of 
the episcopate which is all powerful in Gaul. And so on. 
One will note here that the cause is characterized as an ob- 
jective appreciation of the situation. The cause of Clovis’ 
conversion is the political and religious state of Gaul; it is the 
relative strengths of the episcopate, the great landowners, and 
the common people. What motivates the conversion of the 
bonds is the state of the national debt. Nevertheless this ob- 
jective appreciation can be made only in the light of a pre- 
supposed end and within the limits of a project of the for- 
itself toward this end. In order for the power of the episcopate 
to be revealed to Clovis as the cause of his conversion (that 
IS, in order for him to be able to envisage the objective conse- 
quences which this conversion could have) it is necessary first 
for him to posit as an end the conquest of Gaul. K we 
suppose that Clovis, has other ends, he can find in the situation 
of the Church causes for his becoming Arian or remaining 
pagan. It is even possible that in the consideration of the 
Church he can even find no cause for acting in any way at 
^1; he will then discover nothing in relation to this subject; 
he will leave the situation of the episcopate .in the state of 
unrevealed,” in a total obscurity. We shall therefore use the 
term cause for the objective apprehension of a determined sit- 



576 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


uation as this situation is revealed in the light of a certain end 
as being able to serve as the means for attaining this end. 

The motive, on the contrary, is generally considered as a 
subjective fact. It is the ensemble of the desires, emotions, and 
passions which urge me to accomplish a certain act. The his- 
torian looks for motives and takes them into account only as a 
last resort when the causes are not sufldcient to explain the 
act under consideration, Ferdinand Lot, for example, after 
having shown that the reasons which are ordinarily given for 
the conversion of Constantine are insufficient or erroneous, 
writes; “Since it is established that Constantine had eveiy- 
thing to lose and apparently nothing to gain by embracing 
Christianity, there is only one conclusion possible — that he 
yielded to a sudden impulse, pathological or divine as you 
prefer.”^ Lot is here abandoning the explanation by causes, 
which seems to him unenlightening, and prefers to it an ex- 
planation by motives. The explanation must then be sought 
in the psychic state — even in the “mental” state — of the his- 
torical agent. It follows naturally that the. event becomes 
wholly contiugent since another inffividual with other passions 
and other desires would have acted differently. In contrast to 
the historian the psychologist will by preference look for 
motives; usually he supposes, in fact, that they are “contained 
in” the state of consciousness which has provoked the action. 
The ideal rational act would therefore be the one for which 
the motives would be practically nil and which would be 
uniquely inspired by an. objective appreciation of the situation. 
The irrational or passionate act will be characterized by the 
reverse proportion. 

It remains for us to explain the relation between causes and 
motives in the everyday case in which they exist side by side. 
For example, I can join the Socialist party because I judge that 
this party serves the interests of justice and of humanity or 
because I believe that it will become the principal historical 
force in the years which will follow my joining: these are 
causes. And at the same time I can have motives: a feel" 
ing of pity or charity for certain classes of the oppressed, a 
feeling of shame at being on the “good side of the barricade,” 
as Gide says, or again an inferiority complex, a desire to shock 
my relatives, etc. What can be meant by the statement that I 
have joined the Socialist party for these causes and these 

^ Ferdinand Lot. Im fin du monde antique et le dibut du ittoyen dge. 
Renaissance du Livref 1927, p. 35. 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 577 

motives? Evidently we are dealing with two radically distinct 
layers' of meaning. How are we to compare them? How are 
we to determine the part played by each of them in the deci- 
sion under consideration? This difiSculty, which certainly is 
the greatest of those raised by the current distinction between 
causes and motives, has never been resolved; few people in- 
deed have so much as caught a glimpse of it. Actually under 
a different name it amounts to positing the existence of a con- 
flict between the will and the passions. But if the classic 
theory is discovered to be incapable of assigning to cause and 
motive their proper influence in the simple instance when they 
join together to produce a single decision, it will be wholly 
impossible® for it to explain or even to conceive of a conflict 
between causes and motives, a conflict in which each group 
would urge its individual decision. Therefore we must start 
over again from the beginning. 

To be sure, the cause is objective; it is the state of con- 
temporary things as it is revealed to a consciousness. It is 
objective that the Roman plebs and aristocracy were corrupted 
by the time of Constantine or that the Catholic Church is 
ready to favor a monarch who at the time of Clovis will help 
it triumph over Arianism. Nevertheless this state of affairs can 
be revealed only to a for-itself since in general the for-itself is 
the being by which “there is” a world. Better yet, it can be 
revealed only to a for-itself which chooses itself in this or 
that particular way — that is, to a for-itself which has made its 
own individuality. The for-itself must of necessity have pro- 
jected itself in this or that way in order to discover the in- 
strumental implications of instrumental-things. Objectively the 
knife is an instrument made of a blade and a handle. I can 
grasp it objectively as an instrument to slice with, to cut with. 
But lacking a hammer, I can just as well grasp the knife as an 
instrument to hammer with. I can make use of its handle to 
pound in a nail, and this apprehension is no less objective, 
^en Clovis appreciates the aid which the Church can fur- 
nish him, it is not certain that a group of prelates or even one 
particular priest has made any overtures to him, nor even that 
any member of the clergy has clearly thought of an alliance 
with a Catholic monarch. The only strictly objective Tacts, 
those which any for-itself whatsoever can establish, are the 
great power of the Church over the people of Gaul and the 

» Tr. Sartre says ‘VhoUy possible” (tout & fait possible) which I feel sure 



578 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


anxiety of the Church with regard to the Arian heresy. In 
order for these established facts to be organized into a cause 
for conversion, it is necessary to isolate them from the en- 
semble — and thereby to nihilate them — and it is necessary 
to transcend them toward a particular potentiality: the 
Church’s potentiality objectively apprehended by Clovis 
will be to give its support to a converted king. But this 
potentiality can be revealed only if the situation is surpassed 
toward a state of thin gs which does not yet exist — in short, 
toward a nothingness. In a word the world gives counsel 
only if one questions it, and one can question it only for a 
well-determined end. 

Therefore the cause, far from determining the action, 
appears only in and through the project of an action. It is 
in and through the project of imposing his rule on all of 
Gaul that the state of the Western Church appears objectively 
to Clovis as a cause for his conversion. In other words the 
consciousness which carves out the cause in the ensemble of 
the world has already its own structure; it has given its own 
ends to itself, it has projected itself toward its possibles, and 
it has its own manner of hanging on to its possibilities: this 
peculiar manner of holding to its possibles is here affectivity. 
This internal organization which consciousness has given to 
itself in the form of non-positional self-consciousness is strict- 
ly correlative with the carving out of causes in the world. 
Now if one reflects on the matter, one must recognize that the 
internal structure of the for-itself by which it effects in the 
world the upsurge of causes for acting is an “irrational” fact 
in the historical sense of the term. Indeed we can easily under- 
^ stand rationally the technical usefulness of the conversion of 
Clovis under the hypothesis by which he would- have projected 
the conquest of Gaul. But we can not do the same with re- 
gard to his project of conquest. It is not “self-explanatory.” 
Ought it to be interpreted as a result of Clovis’ ambition? 
But precisely what is the ambition if not the purpose of con- 
quering? How could Clovis* ambition be distinguished from 
die precise project of conquering Gaul? Therefore it would 
be useless to conceive of this original project of conquest as 
“incited” by a pre-existing motive which would be ambition. 
It is indeed true that the ambition is a motive since it is 
wholly subjectivity. But as it is not distinct from the project 
of conquering, we shall say that this first project of his possi- 
bilities in the light of which Clovis discovers a cause for 



579 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 

being converted is precisely the motive. Then all is made clear 
and we can conceive of the relations of these three terms: 
causes, motives, ends. We are dealing here with a particular 
case of beihg-in-the-world: just as it is the upsurge of the 
for-itself which causes there to be a world, so here it is the 
very being of the for-itself — ^in so far as this being is a pure 
project toward an end — which causes there to be a certain 
objective structure of the world, one which deserves the name 
of cause in the light of this end. The for-itself is therefore the 
consciousness of this cause. But this positional consciousness 
of the cause is on principle a non-thetic consciousness of 
itself as a project toward an end. In this sense it is a motive; 
that is, it experiences itself non-thetically as a project, more 
or less keen, more or less passionate, toward an end at the very 
moment at which it is constituted as a revealing conscious- 
ness of the organization of the world into causes. 

Thus cause and motive are correlative, exactly as the non- 
thetic self-consciousness is the ontological correlate of the thet- 
ic' consciousness of the object. Just as the consciousness of 
something is self-consciousness, so the motive is nothing other 
than the apprehension of the cause in so far as this apprehen- 
sion is self-consciousness. But it follows obviously that the 
cause, the motive, and the end are the three indissoluble terms 
of the thrust of a free and living consciousness which pro- 
jects itself toward its possibilities and makes itself defined by 
these possibilities. 

How does it happen then that the motive appears to the 
psychologist as the affective content of a fact of consciousness 
as this content determines another fact of consciousness or a 
decision? It is because the motive, which is nothing other 
than a non-thetic self-consciousness, slips into the past with 
this same consciousness and along with it ceases to be living. 
^ soon as a consciousness is made-past, it is what I have to 
be in the form of the “was.” Consequently when I turn 
back toward -my consciousness of yesterday, it preserves its 
mtentional significance and its meaning as subjectivity, but, 
^ we have seen, it is fixed; it is outside like a thing, since 
e past is in-itself. The motive becomes then that of which 
ere IS consciousness. It can appear to me in the form of 
empincd knowledge”; as we saw earlier, the dead past 
1 in the aspect of a practical knowing. It 

it ^ toward it so as to make 

xpucit and formulate it while guiding myself by the knowl- 



580 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


edge which it is for me in the present In this case it is an 
object of consciousness; it is this very consciousness of which 
I am conscious. It appears therefore — like my memories in 
general — simultaneously as mine and as transcendent Ordi- 
narily we are surrounded by these motives which we “no 
longer enter,” for we not only have to decide concretely to 
accomplish this or that act but also to accomplish acdons 
which we decided upon the day before or to pursue enter- 
prises in which we arc engaged. In a general way conscious- 
ness at whatever moment it is grasped is apprehended as 
engaged and this very apprehension implies a practical know- 
ing of the motives of the engagement or even a thematic and 
positional explanation of these causes. It is obvious that the 
apprehension of the motive refers at once to the cause, its 
correlate, since the motive, even when made-past and fixed in- 
itself, at least maintains as its meaning the. fact that it has 
been a consciousness of a cause; Le., the discovery of an 
objective structure of the world. But as the motive is in-itself 
and as the cause is objective, they are presented as a dyad 
without ontological distinction; we have seen, indeed, that 
our past is lost in the midst of the world. That is why we 
put them on the same level and why we are able to speak of 
the causes and of the motives' of an action as if they could 
enter into conflict or both concur in determined proportion 
in a decision. 

Yet if the motive is transcendent, if it is only the irreme- 
diable being which we have to be in the mode of the “was,” 
if like all our past it is separated from us by a breadth of 
nothingness, then it can act only if it is recovered; in itself it 
is without force. It is therefore by the very thrust of the en- 
gaged consciousness that a value and a weight will be con- 
ferred on motives and on prior causes. What they have been 
does not depend on consciousness, but consciousness has the 
duty of maintaining them in their existence in the past I 
have willed this or that; here is what remains irremediable 
and which even constitutes my essence, since my essence is 
what I have been. But the meaning held for me by this desire, 
this fear, these objective considerations of the world when 
presently I project myself toward my futures — this must be 
decided by me alone. I determine them precisely and only 
by the very act by which I project myself toward my ends. 
The recovery of former motives — or the rejection or new 
appreciation of them — is not distinct from the project by 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


■581 


which I assign new ends to myself and by which in the light 
of these ends I apprehend myself as discovering a supporting 
cause in the world. Past motives, past causes, present motives 
and causes, future ends, all are organized in an indissoluble 
unity by the very upsurge of a freedom which is beyond 
causes, motives, and ends. 

The result is that a voluntary deliberation is always a 
deception. How can I evaluate causes and motives on which 
I myself confer their value before all deliberation and by 
the very choice which I make of myself? The illusion here 
stems from the fact that we endeavor to take causes and mo- 
tives for entirely transcendent things which I balance in my 
hands like weights and which possess a weight as a perma- 
nent property. Yet on the other hand we try to view them as 
contents of consciousness, and this is self-contradictory. 
Actually causes and motives have only the weight which, my 
project — i.e., the free production of the end and of the known 
act to be realized — confers upon them. When I deliberate, the 
chips are down.® And if I am brought to the point of deliberat- 
ing, this is simply because it is a part of my original project 
to realize motives by means of deliberation rather than by 
some other form of discovery (by passion, for example, or 
simply by action, which reveals to me the organized ensemble 
of causes and of ends as my language informs me of my 
thought). There is therefore a choice of deliberation 'as a 
procedure which will make known to me what I project and 
consequently what I am. And the chbice of deliberation is 
organized with the ensemble motives-causes and ends by free 
spontaneity. When the will intervenes, the decision is taken, 
and it has no other value than that of making the announce- 
ment. 

The voluntary act is distinguished from involuntary spon- 
taneity in'that the latter is a purely unreflective consciousness 
of causes across the pure and simple project of the act. As for 
the motive, in the unreflective act it is not an object for 
but a simple non-positional self-consciousnesl The strucrcre 
of the voluntary act, on the other hand, requires the 
ance of a reflective consciousness which apprehends 
tive as a quasi-object or which even intends it as 2 
object across the consciousness reflected-on. For ths--^'^' 
cause, since it is grasped by the intermediary of ^ 

9 Tr. Les jeux sont faits. Sartre has written a scenario by ^ 

1947; translated by Louise Varbse, ’•-U.1948.J 




S82 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ness reflected-on, is as separated. To adopt Husserl’s famous 
expression, simple voluntary reflection by its structure as 
reflectivity practices the with regard to the cause; it 

holds the cause in suspense, puts it within parentheses. Thus 
it can build up a semblance of appreciative deliberation by 
the fact that a more profound nihilation separates the reflec- 
tive consciousness from the consciousness reflected-on or mo- 
tive and by the fact that the cause is suspended. Nevertheless, 
as we know, although the result of the reflection is to widen 
the gap which separates the for-itself from itself, such is not 
its goal. The goal of the reflective scissiparity is, as we have 
seen, to recover the reflected-on so as to constitute that un- 
realizable totality “In-itself-for-itself,” which is the funda- 
mental value posited by the for-itself in the very upsurge of 
its being. If, therefore, the will is in essence reflective, its 
goal is not so much to decide what end is to be attained since 
in any case the chips are down; the profound intention of 
the will bears rather on the method of attaining this end 
already posited. The for-itself which exists in the voluntary 
mode wishes to recover itself in so far as it decides and acts. 
It does not wish merely to be carried toward an end, nor to 
be the one which chooses itself as carried toward a particular 
end; it wishes again to recover itself as a spontaneous project 
toward this or that particular end. The ideal of the will is to 
be an “in-itself-for-itself” as a project toward a certain end. 

This is evidently a reflective ideal and it is the meaning 
of the satisfaction which accompanies a judgment such as, “I 
have done what I wished to do.” But it is evident that the 
reflective scissiparity in general has its foundation in a proj- 
ect more profound than itself, a project which for lack of a 
better term we called “motivation” in Part Two, Chapter 
Three. Now that we have defined cause and mptive, it is 
necessary to give to this project which underlies reflection the 
name intention. To the extent therefore that the will is 
an instance of reflection, the fact of its being placed so 
as to act on the voluntary level demands for its foundation 
a more profound intention. It is not enough for the psy- 
chologist to describe a particular subject as realizing Ns 
project in the mode of voluntary reflection; the psychol- 
ogist must also be capable of releasing to us the profound 
intention, which makes the subject realize his project 
in this mode of volition rather than in a wholly 
different mode. Moreover, it must be clearly imder- 



, BEING AND' DOING: FREEDOM 583 

stood that any mode of consciousness whatsoever may .have 
produced Ae same realization once the ends are posited by an 
original project. Thus we have touched on a more profound 
freedom than the will, simply by showing ourselves to be more 
exacting than the psychologists; that is, by raising the question 
“"Why?” whereas they limit themselves to establishing the mode 
of consciousness as volitional. 

This brief study does not attempt to exhaust the ques- 
tion of the will; on the contrary, it would be desirable to 
attempt a phenomenological description of the will for itself. 
But this is not our goal; we hope simply that we have shown 
that the will is not a privileged manifestation of freedom but 
that it is a psychic event of a peculiar structure which is con- 
stituted on the same plane as other psychic events and which 
is supported, neither more nor less ihm the others, by an 
original, ontological freedom. 

By the same token freedom appears as an unanalyzable 
totality; causes, motives, and ends, as well as the mode of 
apprehending causes, motives, and ends, are organized in a 
unity within the compass of this freedom and must be under- 
stood in terms of it. Does this mean that one must view 
freedom as a series of capricious jerks comparable to the 
Epicurean clinamen? Am I free to wish anything whatso- 
ever at any moment whatsoever? And must I at each instant 
when I wish to explain this or that project encounter the 
irrationality of a free and contingent choice? Inasmuch as it 
has seemed that the recognition of freedom had as its con- 
sequence these dangerous conceptions which are complete- 
ly contradictory to experience, worthy thinkers have turned 
away from a belief in freedom. One could even state that 
determinism — if one were careful not to confuse it with 
fatalism — is “more human” than the theory of free will. In 
fact while determinism throws into relief the strict condition- 
ing of our acts, it does at least give the reason for each of 
them. 'And if it is strictly limited to the psychic, if it gives 
up looking for a conditioning in the ensemble of the uni- 
verse, it shows that the reason for our acts is in ourselves: we 
act as we are, and our acts contribute to making us. 

Let us consider more closely however the few certain re- 
sults which our analysis has enabled us to attain. We have 
shown that freedom is actually one with the being of the For- 
itselt; human reality is free to the exact extent that it has to 
® own nothingness. It has to be this nothingness, as we 



584 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

have seen, in multiple dimensions: first, by temporalizing it- 
self i.e., by being: always at a distance from itself, which 

means that it can never let itself be determined by its past to 
perform this or that particular act; second, by rising up as 
consciousness of something and (of) itself — i.e., by being 
presence to itself and not simply self, which implies that 
nothing exists in consciousness which is not consciousness of 
existing and that consequently nothing external to conscious- 
ness can motivate it; and finally, by being transcendence — i.e., 
not something which would first be in order subsequently to 
put itself into relation with this or that end, but on the con- 
trary, a being which is originally a project — i.e., which is 
defined by its end. 

Thus we do not intend here to speak of anything arbi- 
trary or capricious. An existent which as consciousness is 
necessarily separated from all others because they are in con- 
, nection with it only to the extent that they are for it, an ex- 
istent which decides its past in the form of a tradition in the 
light of its future instead of allowing it purely and simply to 
determine its present, an existent which makes known to itself 
what it is by means of something other than it (that is, by an 
end which it is not and which it projects from the other side 
of the world) — ^this is' what We call a free existent. This does 
not mean that I am free to get up or to sit down, to enter or to 
go out, to flee or to face danger — if one means by freedom 
here a pure capricious, unlawful, gratuitous, and incomprehen- 
sible contingency. To be sure, each one of my acts, even the 
most trivial, is entirely free in the sense which we have just 
defined; but this does not -mean that my act can be anything 
whatsoever or even that it is unforeseeable. Someone, never- 
theless, may object and ask how if my act can be understood 
neither in terms of the state of the world nor in terms of the 
ensemble of my past taken as an irremediable thing, it could 
possibly be anything but gratuitous; Let us look more closely. 

Common opinion does not hold that to be free means 
only to choose oneself. A choice is said to be free if it is such 
that it could have been other than what it is. I start out on a 
hike with friends. At the end of several hours of walking my 
fatigue increases and finally becomes very painful. At first I 
resist and then suddenly I let myself go, I give up, I throw 
my knapsack down on the side of the road and let myself 
fall down beside it. Someone will reproach me for my act and 
will mean thereby that I was free^ — that is, not only was my 



suiBS ai "sadois aq; jo XiijEnb „snoure}unoui„ sip Suusaoo 
- sip -loj ‘sqjBd aqj jo sssuqgnoj Aqsoi sqj 03 Jissiujq Supdepe 
JOJ ‘ttiR spunojjns qoiq/A p[iOM 3 q 3 . SuusAOosip’ Joj '30301 
-ruqsui psSsiiAud sip sb Xbai auios ui uiiq'03 siBsdds 31 ‘.q3Bq 
B 03 SB 3 X 03 Jissuiiq s3aiS aq ‘.anSpBj siq sbaoi Wq3 3nq 
‘asjnoo JO ‘panSpBj si aq 3 Bq 3 auL 03 uiBidxa piAi aq ‘suoiUBd 
-uioo Aui JO auo uoijsanb j jj 'ajmoaijs AjBpuooas b sb pa^BiS 
.3301 aq pinoAV 31 qoiqM or aoioqo jaSiBi b jo aApoadsiad 
3q3 onpiM pauiBidxa . 3011 si 31 laipaqAi aas 03 piiB jias3i 
aaioqo siq3 ainiuBxa 03 jduiapB 03 XjBssaoau si 31 iaaioqo b 
iCjno Suiaq sb paj^BSASJ sjb qoiq/A *soaAi 3 jBn.3aBj papBo-os 03 
j[ 3 sauo ssaappB 03 dpq 30U ipA\ 31 ‘aiqBJBaqun sb anSpBj b 
jagns HBD j suopipuoo 3BqA\ lapun puB 3 si 3 pun 03"qsTAS. 
I sjojsjaqj ji -anSpBj Aux jajjns j qan^Av m Abm aip 03 naAiS 
3UIBU B Apio SI puB nsAiS jBipoBj B aq 30U UBO „Assis„ B aq 
03 AlJBiiuns 713531 3sanbuo3 siqj si 31 i 3 sanbuoa 03 auo 331001 
pinoM qoiqAi u 9 aj 8 b 30U si 31 isjouoq jo auoiq3 b Suuanbuoo 
psfojd 03 SI snopfquiB aq 03 J^qj naas aABq a^ -aiaq sn AjspBS 
30U UBO uopBiqBAS UB qoiis ‘uopipadxa J 3 q 3 ouB uo am aqB3 03 
Bapi poo§ B aq pinoA\ 31 jou jo laipaqAV Suipioap jo uopsanb 
B asojB ajaqj uaqM junoooB ojui siip aqB 3 pinoo auo qknoip 
-jB puB asBO aqj uo SuiJBaq [BopoBid b SBq XjqBiuapuii uop 
-BniBAa siqj q§noq 3 iB jng pou ojb siaipo aip 3 Bq 3 puB „i{ssis„ 
B uiB I 3 Bqj PBj aq 3 uioij suia3S aouaiapip aq3 3 Bq 3 Abs ipAi 
suoauios snSijBj Jiaqj lagns Aaip 3Bq3 aJojajaq3 

aaddBq 31 saop avoji ,/uib j sb panSpBj sb„ sasodind [Boipsid 
I[B joj ajB Aaqi 3Bq3 — aprqouoo sj 9 q 30 -JOj-saipoq Juo jo uop 
-Biapisuoo OApoafqo ub ja3jB sassau3iAi puB — apnpuoo XjiBusn 
I ‘sapiApoafqns juajajjip ui jnooo qoiqAi S3uaAa oiqoiCsd duvd 
-uioo 03 aiqissod 30U si 31 qSnoqjiB 3Bq3 os j sb Suiuibjj atuBS 
3ip AjpopoBid pBq aABq Aaqj iain aqq — ^qjpaq pooS ui ajB 
suoiuEdnioo Am :uoi3sanb ppuassa aip pajisod si aian 

'a[qBjap3m sb an§pBj aqj 
sia^gns dn 3nisu qoiqAi jiasq-jo^j aApoapai aq3 si 31 jnq ‘jjasji 
ui SuiqjvtuB aq jaAau qiAi JI '3iqBiaio3Ui jo apBJBaq sb am 03 
jBaddB qi/A angpBj aqj jBtp aoBid siqj uo Ajuo si 31 -JiaSiCin 03 
nopBjaj poipBjd b puB anjBA b 31 uo jajuoo 03 puB 31 aAq 
03 japjo UI an3pBj Am uodn papajip si ssausnoiosuoo aAp 
-oagaj b ‘si 3Bqx 'anSpBj Am uaffns j ‘ured 03 joadsaj q3TAi mbs 
aM SB ‘jaipBj tanSpBj Am jo uoisuaqajddB aApBidiua3uo3 b qs 
3B 300 SI 31 'SI 31 3BqM JOJ 31 asfBj sn jsi ‘JOAaMoq iuop 
-uajui auiBS siip joj uopBjajdjajui ub apiAOjd 03 jqSno Xquaj 
®Ai ‘JI JSAOoaj 03 puB anSpBj Am japisuoo 03 qaas op i uaqM 


SSaMONIHXOiSE QNV OiSLiaa 


98S 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


587 


way it is this light sunburn on the back of his neck and this 
slight ringing in his ears which will enable him to realize a 
direct contact with the sun. Finally the feeling of effort is for 
him that of fatigue overcome. But as' his fatigue is nommg 
but the passion which he endures so that the dust of the 
highways, the burning of the sun, the roughness of the roads 
may exist to the fullest, his effort (i.e., this sweet familianty 
with a fatigue which he loves, to wMch he abandons himself 
and which nevertheless he himself directs) is given as a way - .. 
of appropriating the mountain, of suffering it to the end and 
being victor over it We shall see in the next chapter what is 
the meaning of the word having and to what extent doing" 
is a method of appropriating. Thus my companion’s fatigue is 
lived in a vaster project of a trusting abandon to nature, of a 
passion consented to in order that it may exist at full strength,- 
and at the same time the project of sweet mastery and 
appropriation. It is only in and through this project that the 
fatigue will be able to be understood and that it will have 
meaning for him. 

But this meaning and this vaster, more profound- proj- 
ect are still by themselves Unselbstandig. They are not suffi- 
cient For they precisely presuppose a particular relation of my 


companion to his body, on the one hand, and to things, on 
the other. It is easy to see, indeed, that there are as m^ny ways 
of existing one’s body as there are For-itselfs although nat- 
urally certain original structures are invariable and in each 
For-itself constitute human-reality. We shall be concerned 
elsewhere with what is incorrectly called the relation of the 
individual to space and to the conditions of a universal truth. 
For the moment we can conceive in connection with thou- 
sands of meaningful events that there is, for example, a certain 
type of flight before facticity, a flight which consists precisely 
in abandoning oneself to this facticity; that, is, in short, in 
trustingly reassuming it and loving it in order to try to re- 
cover it. This original project of recovery is therefore a cer- 
tain-choice which the For-itself makes of itself in the pres- 
ence of the problem of being. Its project remains a nihilation, 
out this nihilation turns back upon the in-itself which it ni- 
hilat^and expresses itself by a particular valorization of factic- 
ity. This is expressed especially by the thousands of behavior 
patterns called abandon. To abandon oneself to fatigue to 
warmth, to hunger, to thirst, to let oneself fall back upon a 
nair or a bed with sensual pleasure, to relax, to attempt to 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 587 

way it is this light sunburn on the back of neck and this 
slight ringing in his ears which will enable hun to realize a 
direct contact with the sun. Finally the feelmg of effort is for 
him that of fatigue overcome. But as’ his fatigue is nothing 
but the passion which he endures so that the dust of the 
highways, the burning of the sun, the roughness of the roads 
may exist to the fullest, his effort (I’.e., this sweet familiarity 
with a fatigue which he loves, to which he abandons himself 
and which nevertheless he himself directs) is given as a way 
of appropriating the mountain, of suffering it to the end and 
being victor over it. We shall see in the next chapter what is 
the meaning of the word having and to what extent doing' 
is a method of appropriating. Thus my companion’s fatigue is 
lived in a vaster project of a trusting abandon to nature, of a 
passion consented to in order that it may exist at full strength, 
and at the same time the project of sweet mastery and 
appropriation. It is only in and through this project that the 
fatigue will be able to be understood and that it will have 
meaning for him. 

But this meaning and this vaster, more profound- proj- 
ect are still by themselves Unselbstandig. They are not suffi- 
cient For they precisely presuppose a particular relation of my 
companion to his body, on the one hand, and to things, on 
the other. It is easy to see, indeed, that there are as many ways 
of existing one’s body as there are For-itselfs although nat- 
urally certain original structures are invariable and in each 
For-itself constitute human-reality. We shall be concerned 
elsewhere with what is incorrectly called the relation of the 
individual to space and to the conditions of a universal truth. 
For the moment we can conceive in connection with thou- 
sands of meaningful events that there is, for example, a certain 
type of flight before facticity, a flight which consists precisely 
in abandoning oneself to this facticity; that is, in short, in 
trustingly reassuming it and loving it in order to try to re- 
cover it. This original project of recovery is therefore a cer- 
tam choice which the For-itself makes of itself in the pres- 
ence of the problem of being. Its project remains a nihilation, 
out this nihilation turns back upon the in-itself which it ni- 
®^Pr®sses itself by a particular valorization of factic- 
IS expressed especially by the thousands of behavior 
patterns called abandon. To abandon oneself to fatigue to 

S ' •“ upon a 

nair or a bed with sensual pleasure, to relax, to attempt to 



588 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

let oneself be drunk in by one’s own body, not now beneath 
the eyes of others as in masochism but in the original soli- 
tude of the For-itself — none of these types of behavior can 
ever be confined to itself. We perceive this clearly since in 
another person they irritate or attract. Their condition is an 
initial project of the recovery of the body; that is, an attempt 
at a solution of the problem of the absolute (of the In-itself- 
for-itself ) . 

This ^initial form can itself be limited to a profound 
acceptance of facticity; the project of “making oneself body” 
will mean then a happy abandon to a thousand little passing 
gluttonies, to a thousand little desires, a thousand little weak- 
nesses. One may recall from Joyce’s Ulysses Mr. Bloom satis- 
fying his natural needs and inhaling with favor “the intimate 
odor rising from beneath him.” But it is also possible (and 
this is the case with my companion) that by means of the 
body and by compliance to the body, the For-itself seeks to 
recover the totality of the non-conscious — that is, the 
whole universe as the ensemble of material things. In this case 
the desired synthesis of the in-ltself with the for-itself will be 
the quasi-pantheistic synthesis of the totality of the in-itself 
with the for-itself which recovers it. Here the body is the in- 
strument of the synthesis; it loses itself in fatigue, for ex- 
ample, in order that this in-itself may exist to the fullest. And 
since it is the body which the for-itself exists as its own, this 
passion of the body coincides for the for-itself with the proj- 
ect of “making the in-itself exist.” The ensemble of this 
attitude — ^which is that of one of my companions — can be ex- 
pressed by the dim feeling of a kind of mission: he is going 
on this expedition because the mountain which he is going to 
climb and the forests which he is going to cross exist; his 
mission is to be the one by whom their meaning will be made 
manifest. Therefore he attempts to be the one who founds 
them in their very existence. 

We shall return in the next chapter to this appropria- 
tive relation between the for-itself and the world, but we do 
not yet have at hand the elements necessary to elucidate it 
fully. In any case it is evident following our analysis that the 
way in which my companion suffers his fatigue necessarily 
demands — if we are to understand it — that we imdertake a 
regressive analysis which will lead us back to an initial proj- 
ect. Is this project we have outlined finally selbstdndig? Cer- 
tainly and it can be easily proved to be so. In fact by going 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


589 


further and further back we have reached the original relation 
which the for-itself chooses with its facticity and with the 
world. But this original relation is nothing other than the for- 
itself’s being-in-the-world inasmuch as this being-in-the-world 
'is a choice — that is, we have reached the original type of ni- 
hhation by which the for-itself has to be its own nothingness. 
No interpretation of this can be attempted, for it would im- 
plicitly suppose the being-in-the-world of the for-itself just 
as all the demonstrations attempted by Euclid’s Postulate im- 
plicitly suppose the adoption of this postulate. 

Therefore if I apply this same method to interpret the way 
in which I suffer my fatigue, I shall first apprehend in myself a 
distrust of my body — ^for example, a way of wishing not “to 
have anything to do with it,” wanting not to take it into 
account, which is simply one of numerous possible modes in 
which I can exist my body. I shall easily discover an analo- 
gous distrust with respect to the in-itself and, for example, an 
original project for recovering the in-itself which I nihilate 
through the intermediacy of others, which project in turn 
refers me to one of the initial projects which we enumerated 
in our preceding discussion. Hence my fatigue instead of 
being suffered “flexibly” will be grasped “sternly” as an im- 
portunate phenomenon which I want to get rid of — and this 
simply because it incarnates my body and my brute contin- 
gency in the midst of the world at a time when my project 
is to preserve my body and my presence in the world by means 
of the looks of others. I am referred to myself as well as to 
my original project; that is, to my being-in-the-world in so far 
as this being is a choice. 

We are not attempting to disguise how much this method 
of andysis leaves to be desired. This is because everything re- 
rnains still to be done in this field. The problem indeed is to 
disengage the meanings implied by an act — by every act — and 
to proceed from there to richer and more profound meanings 
until we encounter the meaning which does not imply any 
o&er meaning and which refers only to itself. This ascending 
dialect is practiced spontaneously by most people; it can even 
be established that in knowledge of oneself or of another there 
IS given a spontaneous comprehension of this hierarchy of 
interpretations. A gesture refers to a Weltanschauung and we 
sense it. But nobody has attempted a systematic disengagement 
of the meanings implied by an act. TTiere is only one school 
which has based its approach on the same original evidence as 



590 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


we, and that is the Freudian. For Freud as for us an act can 
not be limited to itself; it refers immediately to more profound 
structures. And psychoanalysis is the method which enables us 
to make these structures explicit. Freud like us asks: under 
what conditions is it possible that this particular person has 
performed this particular act? Like us he refuses to interpret 
the action by the antecedent moment — i.e., to conceive of a 
horizontal psychic determinism. The act appears to him sym- 
bolic; that is, it seems to him to express a more profound de- 
sire which itself could be interpreted only in terms of an 
initial determination of the subject’s libido. Freudi however, 
aims at constituting a vertical determinism. In addition be- 
cause of this bias his conception necessarily is going to refer 
to the subject’s past. Affectivity for Freud is at the basis of 
the act in the form of psycho-physiological drives. But this 
affectivity is originally in each of us a tabula rasa; for Freud 
xthe external circumstances and, so to speak, the history of 
the subject will decide whether this or that drive will be fixed 
on this or that object. It is the child’s situation in the family 
which will determine in him the birth of the Oedipus com- 
plex; in other societies composed of families of another 
type (such as, for example, among primitive peoples on the 
Coral Islands in the Pacific) this complex could not be 
formed. Furthermore it is again external circumstances which 
will decide whether at the age of puberty this complex will be 
“resolved” or, on the contrary, will remain the pole of the 
sexual life. Consequently through the intermediacy of history 
Freud’s vertical determinism remains axised on a horizontal 
determinism. To be sure, a particular symbolic act expresses 
an underlying, contemporaneous desire just as this desire 
manifests a more profound complex and all this within the 
unity of a single psychic process; but the complex nonetheless 
pre-exists its symbolic manifestation. It is the past which has 
constituted it such as it is and in accordance with the classic 
connections, transfer, condensation, etc., which we find 
mentioned not only in psychoanalysis but in all attempts at a 
deterministic reconstruction of the psychic life. Consequent- 
ly the dimension of the future does not exist for psychoanaly- 
sis. Human reality loses one of its ekstases and must be 
interpreted solely by a regression toward the past from the 
standpoint of the present. At the same time the fundamental 
structures of the subject, which are signified by its acts, are 
not so signified for him but for an objective witness who uses 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


591 


discursive methods to make these meanings explicit. No pre- 
ontological comprehension of the meamng of his acts is grant- 
ed to the subject. And this is just, since in spite of every- 
thing his acts are only a result of the past, which is on 
principle out of reach, instead of seeking to inscribe their goal 
in the future. 

Thus we should restrict ourselves to taking the psycho- 
analytic method as our inspiration; that is, we should attempt 
to disengage the meanings of an act by proceeding from the 
principle that every action, no matter how trivial, is not the 
simple effect of the prior psychic state and does not result 
from a linear determinism but rather is integrated as a 
secondary structure in global structures and finally in the 
totality which- I am. Otherwise, in fact, I should have t& 
understand myself either as a horizontal flux of phenomena, 
each one of which is externally conditioned by the preceding 
— or as a supporting substance for a flow, a substance de- 
prived of the meaning of its modes. Both these conceptions 
would lead us to confuse the for-itself with the in-itself . 


But if we accept the method of psychoanalysis — and we 
shall discuss this at length in the following chapter — ^we must 
apply it in a reverse sense. Actually we conceive of every act as 
a comprehensible phenomenon, and we do not admit any deter- 
ministic “chance” as Freud does. But instead of understanding 
the considered phenomenon in terms of the past, we con- 
ceive of the comprehensive act as a turning back of the future 


toward the present. The way in which I suffer my fatigue 
is ia no way dependent on the chance difiBculty of the slope 
which I am climbing or on the more or less restless night 
which I have spent; these factors can contribute to con- 
stituting my fatigue itself but not to the way in which I suffer 
it. But we refuse to view this as one of Adler’s disciples 
would, as an expression of an inferiority complex, for ex- 
ample, in the sense that this complex would be a prior forma- 
tion. That a certain passionate and tense way of struggling 
agamst the fatigue can .express what is called an inferiority 
complex we shall not deny. But the inferiority complex itself 

for-itself in the world in the presence 
o the Other. As such it is always transcendence, as such again 
t is a way of choosing myself. This inferiority which I strug- 
g e agamst and which nevertheless I recognize, this I have 

indicated by my various 
p terns of failure behavior”; but to be exact it is nothing 



592 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


other than the organized totality of my failure behavior, as a 
projected plan, as a general device of my being, and each 
attitude of failure is itself transcendence since each time I 
surpass the real toward my possibilities. To give in to fatigue, 
for example, is to transcend the path by causing it to con- 
stitute in itself the meaning of “a path too difficult to tra- 
verse.” It is impossible seriously to consider the feeling of 
inferiority without determining it in terms of the future and 
of my possibilities. Even assertions such as “I am ugly,” “I am 
stupid,” etc. are by nature anticipations. We are not dealing 
here with the pure establishment of my ugliness but with the 
apprehension of the coefficient of adversity which is presented 
by women or by society to my enterprises. And this can be 
discovered only through and in the choice of these enter- 
prises. Thus the inferiority complex is a free and global proj- 
ect of myself as inferior before others; it is the way in which 
l' choose to assume my being-for-others, the free solution 
which I give to the Other’s existence, that insuperable scandal. 
Thus it is necessary to understand my reactions of inferiority 
and my failure behavior in terms of the free outline of my 
inferiority as a choice of myself in the world. 

We grant to the psychoanalysts that every human- reaction 
is a priori comprehensible. But we reproach them for having 
misunderstood just this initial “comprehensibility” as is shown 
by their trying to explain the reaction under consideration by 
means of a prior reaction, which would reintroduce causal 
mechanism; comprehension must be otherwise defined. Every 
project is comprehensible as a project of itself toward a pos- 
sible. It is comprehensible first in so far as it offers a rational 
content which is immediately apprehensible — I place my 
knapsack on the ground in order to rest for a moment. This 
means that we immediately apprehend the possible which it 
projects and the end at which it aims. In the second place 
it is comprehensible in that the possible under consideration 
refers to other possibles, these to still others, and so on to 
the ultimate possibility which I am. The comprehension is 
effected in two opposed senses: by a regressive psychoanalysis 
one ascends back from the considered act to my ultimate possi- 
ble; and by a synthetic progression one redescends from this 
ultimate possible to the considered act and grasps its integra- 
tion in the total form. 

This form which we call our ultimate possibility is not 
just one possible among others — not even though it be, as 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


593 


Heidegger claims, the possibility of dying or of “no longer 
realizing any presence in the world,” Every particular possi- 
bility, in fact, is articulated in an ensemble. It is necessary 
to conceive of this ultimate possibility as the unitary syn- 
thesis of all our actual possibles; each of these possibles re- 
sides in an undifferentiated state in the ultimate possibility 
until a particular circumstance comes to throw it into relief 
without, however, thereby suppressing its quality of belong- 
ing to the totality. Indeed we pointed out in Part Two that the 
perceptive apprehension of any object whatsoever is effected 
on the ground of the world.^^ By this we meant that what the 
psychologists are accustomed to call “perception” can not be 
limited to objects which are strictly “seen” or “understood” 
etc. at a certain instant but that the objects considered refer 
by means of implications and various significations to the 
totality of the existent in-itself from the standpoint of which 
they are apprehended. Thus it is not true that I proceed by 
degrees from that table to the room where I am and then 
going out pass from there to the hall, to the stairway, to the 
street in order finally to conceive as the result of a passage to 
the limit, the world as the sum of all existents. Quite the 
contrary, I can not perceive any instrumental thing whatso- 
ever unless it is in terms of the absolute existence of all exis- 
tents, for my first being is being-in-the-world. 

Thus we find that for man in so far as “there are” things, 
there is in things a perpetual appeal toward the integration 
which makes us apprehend things by descending from the 
total integration which is immediately realized down to this 
particular structure which is interpreted only in relation to 
this totality. But on the other hand if there is a world, it is 
because we rise up into the world suddenly and in totality. 
We have observed, in fact, in that same chapter devoted to 
transcendence, that the in-itself by itself alone is not capable 
of any unity as a world. But our upsurge is a passion in this 
sense that we lose ourselves in nihilation in order that a world 
may exist. Thus the first phenomenon of being in the world is 
the original relation between the totality of the in-itself or 
world and my own totality detotalized; I choose myself as a 
whole in the world which is a whole. Just as I come from 
the world to a particular “this,” so I come from myself as a 
totality to the outline of one of my particular pos- 
sibilities since I can apprehend a particular “this” on the 

Part Two, Chapter Three. 



594 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


ground of the world only on the occasion of a particular proj- 
ect of myself. But in this case just as I can apprehend a 
particular “this” only on the ground of the world by sur- 
passing it toward this or that possibility, so I can project 
myself beyond the “this” toward this or that possibility only 
on the ground of my ultimate and total possibility. Thus 
my ultimate and total possibility, as the original integra- 
tion of all my particular possibles, and the world as the 
totality which comes to existents by my upsurge into being 
are two strictly correlative notions. I can perceive the ham- 
mer (i.e., outline a plan of “hammering” with it) only on the 
ground of the world; but conversely I can outline this act of 
“hammering” only on the ground of the totality of myself and 
in terms of that totality. 

Thus the fundamental act of freedom is discovered; and it 
is this which gives meaning to the particular action which I 
can be brought to consider. This constantly renewed act is not 
distinct from my being; it is a choice of myself in the world 
and by the same token it is a discovery of the world. This 
enables us to avoid the perilous reef of the unconscious which 
psychoanalysis meets at the start. If nothing is in conscious- 
ness which is not a consciousness of being, some will say to 
us by way of objection that then this fundamental choice must 
of necessity be a conscious choice. They will ask, “Can you 
maintain that when you yield to fatigue, you are conscious of 
all the implications which this fact supposes?” We shall reply 
that we are perfectly conscious of them. Only this conscious- 
ness itself must have for its limit the structure of conscious- 
ness in general and of the choice which we are making. 

So far as the latter is concerned, we must insist on the 
fact that the question here is not of a deliberate choice. This 
is not because the choice is less conscious or less explicit than 
a deliberation but rather because it is the foundation of all 
deliberation and because as we have seen, a deliberation re- 
quires an interpretation in terms of an original choice. There- 
fore it is necessary to defend oneself against the illusion which 
would make of original freedom a positing of causes and 
motives as objects, then a decision from the standpoint of 
these causes and these motives. Quite the contrary, as soon as 
there are cause and motive (that is, an appreciation of things 
and of the structures of the world) there is already a positing 
of ends and consequently a choice. But this does not mean 
that the profound choice is thereby unconscious. It is simply 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 595 

one with the consciousness which we have of ourselves. 'Hiis 
consciousness, as we know, can be only non-positional; it is 
we-as-consciousness since it is not distinct from our being. 
And as our being is precisely our original choice, the con- 
sciousness (of) the choice is identical with the self-conscious- 
ness which we have. One must be conscious in order to 
' choose, and one must choose in order to be conscious. Choice 
and consciousness are one and the same thing. This is what 
many psychologists have felt when they declared that con- 
sciousness was “selection.” But because they havp not traced 
this selection back to its ontological foundation, they have re- 
mained on a level in which the selection appeared as a 
gratuitous function of a consciousness in other respects sub- 
stantial. This reproach may in particular be leveled against 
Bergson. But if it has been well established that conscious- 
ness is a nihilation, the conclusion is that to be conscious of 
ourselves and to choose ourselves are one and the same. This 
is the explanation of the difficulties which moralizers like 
Gide have met when they wanted to define the purity of the 
feelings. What difference is there, Gide asked, between a 
willed feeling and an experienced feeling?ii Actually there is 
no difference. “To will to love” and to love are one since to 
love is to choose oneself as loving by assuming consciousness 
of loving. If the tcccoxco is free, it is a choice. 

We have remarked sufficiently — in particular in the chap- 
ter concerning Temporality — ^that the Cartesian cogito must 
be extended. In fact, as we have seen, to assume self-con- 
sciousness never means to assume a consciousness of the in- 
stant; for the instant is only one view of the mind and even 
if it existed, a consciousness- which would apprehend itself 
in the instant would no longer apprehend anything. I can 
assume consciousness of myself only as a particular man en- 
gaged in this or that enterprise, anticipating this or that 
success, fearing this or that result, and by means of the en- 
semble of these anticipations, outlining his whole figure. 
Indeed it is thus that I am apprehending myself at this 
moment when I am writing; I am not the simple perceptive 
consciousness of my hand which is making marks on the 
paper. I am well in advance of this hand ail the way to the 
- completion of the book and to the meaning of this book — 
aud of philosophical activity in general — ^in my life. It is 
within the compass of this project (i.e., within the compass 

"^Journal des faux monnayeurs. (The Counterfeiters.) 



596 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


of what I am) that there are inserted certain projects toward 
more restricted possibilities such as that of presenting this or 
that idea in this or that way or of ceasing to write for a mo- 
ment or of paging through a volume in which I am looking 
for this or that reference, etc. Nevertheless it would be an 
error to believe that there is an analytical and differentiated 
consciousness corresponding to this global choice. My ulti- 
mate and initial project — ^for these are but one — is, as we shall 
see, always the outline of a solution of the problem of being. 
But this solution is not first conceived and then realized; we 
are this solution. We make it exist by means of our' very 
engagement, and therefore we shall be able to apprehend it 
only by living it. Thus we are always wholly present to our- 
selves; but precisely because we are wholly present, we can 
not hope to have an analytical and detailed consciousness of 
what we are. Moreover this consciousness can be only non- 
thetic. 

On the other hand, the world by means of its very articu- 
lation refers to us exactly the image of what we are. Not, as 
we have seen so many times, that we can decipher this image 
— i.e., break it down and subject it to analysis — but 
because the world necessarily appears to us as we are. In fact 
it is by surpassing the world toward ourselves that we make 
it appear such as it is. We choose the world, not in its contex- 
ture as in-itself but in its meaning, by choosing ourselves. 
Through the internal negation by denying that we are the 
world, we make the world appear as world, and this internal 
negation can exist only if it is at the same time a projection 
toward a possible. It is the very way in which I entrust my- 
self to the inanimate, in which I abandon myself to my body 
(or, on the other hand, the way in v/hich I resist either one 
of these) which causes the appearance of both my body and 
the inanimate world with their respective value. Consequently 
there also I enjoy a full consciousness of myself and of my 
fundamental projects, and this time the consciousness is posi- 
tional. Nevertheless, precisely because it is positional, what 
it releases to me is the transcendent image of what I am. The 
value of things, their instrumental role, their proximity and 
real distance (which have no relation to their spatial prox- 
imity and distance) do nothing more than to outline my 
image — ^that is, my choice. My clothing (a uniform or a lounge 
suit, a soft or a starched shirt) whether neglected or cared 
for, carefully chosen or ordinary, my furniture, the street on 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 597 

which I live, the city in which I reside, the books with which 
I surround myself, the recreation which I enjoy, everything 
which is mine (that is, finally, the world of which I am per- 
petually conscious, at least by way of a meaning implied by 
the object which I look at or use): all this informs me of 
my choice — ^that is, my being. But such is the structure of 
the positional consciousness that I can trace this knowledge 
back to a subjective apprehension of myself, and it refers me 
to other objects which I produce or which I dispose of in 
connection with the order of the preceding without being 
able to perceive that I am thus more and more sculpturing 
my figure in the world. Thus we are fully conscious of the 
choice which we are. And if someone objects that in accor- 
dance with these observations it would be necessary to be con- 
scious not of our being-chosen but of choosing ourselves, we 
shall reply that this consciousness is expressed by the two- 
fold “feeling” of anguish and of responsibility. Anguish, 
abandonment, responsibility, whether muted or full strength, 
constitute the quality of our consciousness in so far as this is 
pure and simple freedom. 

Earlier we posed a question: I have yielded to fatigue, we 
said, and doubtless I could have done otherwise but at . 
what price? At present we are in a position to answer this. 
Our analysis, in fact, ,has just shown us that this act was not 
gratuitous. To be sure, it 'was not explained by a motive or 
a cause conceived as the content of a prior state of conscious- 
ness, but it had to be interpreted in terms of an original proj- 
ect of which it formed an integral part. Hence it becomes 
evident that we can not suppose that the' act could have been 
modified without at the same time supposing a fundamental 
modification of my original choice of myself. This way of 
yielding to fatigue and of letting myself fall down at the side 
of the road expresses a certain initial stiffening against my 
body and the inanimate in-itself. It is placed within the com- 
pass of a certain view of the world in which difficulties can 
appear “not worth the trouble of being tolerated”; or, to be 
exact, since the motive is a pure non-thetic consciousness and 
consequently an initial project of itself toward an absolute end 
(a certain aspect of -the in-itself-for-itself), it is an apprehen- 
sion of the world (warmth, distance from the city, uselessness 
of effort, etc.) as the cause of my ceasing to walk. Thus this 
possible — to stop — theoretically takes on its meaning only in 
and through the hierarchy of the possibles which I am in terms 



598 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

of the ultimate and initial possible. This does not imply 
that I must necessarily stop but merely that I can refuse to 
stop only by a radical conversion of my being-in-the-world; 
that is, by an abrupt metamorphosis of my initial project — 
i.e., by another choice of myself and of my ends. Moreover 
this modification is always possible. 

The anguish which, when this possibility is revealed, man- 
ifests our freedom to our consciousness is witness of this 
perpetual modifiability of our initial project. In anguish we 
do not simply apprehend the fact that the possibles which we 
project are perpetually eaten away by our freedom-to-corae; 
in addition we apprehend our choice — Le., ourselves — as 
unjustifiable. This means that we apprehend our choice as 
not deriving from any prior reality but rather as being 
about to serve as foundation for the ensemble of significations 
which constitute reality. Unjustifiability is not only the 
subjective recognition of the absolute contingency of our 
being but also that of the interiorization and recovery of this 
contingency on our own account. For the choice — as we shall 
see — tissues from the contingency of the in-itself which it 
nihilates and transports it to the level of the gratuitous deter- 
mination of the for-itself by itself. Thus we are perpetually 
engaged in our choice and perpetually conscious of the fact 
that we ourselves can abruptly invert this choice and “re- 
verse steam”; for we project the future by our very being, but 
our existential freedom perpetually eats it away as we make 
known to ourselves what we are by means of the future but 
without getting a grip on this future which remains always 
possible without ever passing to the rank of the real. Thus 
we are perpetually threatened by the nihilation of our actual 
choice and perpetually threatened with choosing ourselves — 
and consequently with becoming — other than we are. By the 
sole fact that our choice is absolute, it is fragile; that is, by 
positing our freedom by means of it, we posit by the same 
stroke the perpetual possibility that the choice may become 
a “here and now” which has been made-past in the inter- 
ests of a “beyond” which I shall be. 

Nevertheless let us thoroughly understand that our actual 
choice is such that it furnishes us with no motive for making 
it past by means of a further choice. In fact, it is this origi- 
nal choice which originally creates all causes and all motives 
which can guide us to partial actions; it is this which arranges 
the world with its meaning, its instrumental-complexes, 



599 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 

and its coefficient of adversity. The absolute change which 
threatens us from our birth until our death remains perpet- 
ually unpredictable and incomprehensible. Even if we envis- 
age other fundamental attitudes as possible, we shall never 
consider them except from outside, as the behavior of Others. 
And if we attempt to refer our conduct to them, they shall not 
for all that lose their character as external and as transcended- 
transcendences. To “understand” them in fact would be al- 
ready to have chosen them. We are going to return to this 
point. 

In addition we must not think of the original choice as 
“producing itself from one instant to the next”; this would 
be to return to the instantaneous conception of consciousness 
from which Husserl was never able to free himself. Since, on 
the contrary, it is consciousness which temporalizes itself, we 
must conceive of the original choice as unfolding time and 
being one with the unity of the three ekstases. To choose 
ourselves is to nihilate ourselves; that is, to cause a future to 
come to make known to us what we are by conferring a mean- 
ing on our past. Thus there is not a succession of instants 
separated by nothingness — as with Descartes — such that 
my choice at the instant t can not act on my choice of the 
instant t. To choose is to effect the upsurge along with my 
engagement of a certain finite extension of concrete and con- 
tinuous duration, which is precisely that which separates me 
from the realization of my original possibles. Thus freedom, 
choice, nihilation, temporalization are all one and the same 
thing. 

Yet the instant is not an empty invention of philosophers. 
To be sure, there is no subjective instant when I am engaged 
in my task. At this moment, for example, when I am writing 
and trying to grasp my ideas and put them in order, there 
IS no instant for me, there is only a perpetual pursued-pursuit 
of myself toward the ends which define me (the making ex- 
plicit of ideas which are to form the basis of this work). 
And yet we are perpetually threatened by the instant. That 
IS, we are such, by the very choice of our freedom, that we 
can always cause the instant tor'appear as the rupture of our 
ekstatic unity. What then is the instant? In the process of 
temporalization the instant can not be cut off from a concrete 
project; we have Just shown this. But neither can it be 
identified with the initial term or with the -final term (if it 
IS to exist) of this process. For both of these terms are incor- 



600 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


porated in the totality of the process and are an integral part 
of it. Therefore neither term has the characteristics of the 
instant. The initial term is incorporated in the process of 
which it is the initial term in that it is the process’ beginning. 
But on the other hand, it is limited by a prior nothingness 
in that it is a beginning. The final term is incorporated in 
the process which it terminates in that it is the process’ end; 
the last note belongs to the melody. But it is followed by a 
nothingness which limits it in that it is an end. The in- 
stant, if it is to be able to exist, must be limited by a double 
nothingness. This is in no way conceivable if it is to be given 
ahead of time to all the processes of temporal ization — as 
we have shown. But in the very development of our tem- 
poralization, we can produce instants if certain processes a- 
rise on the collapse of prior processes. The instant will be 
then both a beginning and an end. In short, if the end of 
one project coincides with the begi nnin g of another proj- 
ect, an ambiguous, temporal reality will arise which will be 
limited by a prior nothingness in that it is a beginning and 
limited by a posterior nothingness in that it is an end. But 
this temporal structure will be concrete only if the beginning 
is itself given as the end of the process wMch it is making- 
past A beginning which is given as the end of a prior project 
— such must be the instant. It will exist therefore only if we 
are a beginning and an end to ourselves within the unity of a 
single act. 

Now it is precisely this which is produced in the case of a 
radical modification of our fundamental project By the free 
choice of this modification, in fact, we teraporalize a project 
which we are, and we make known to ourselves by a future the 
being which we have chosen; thus the pure present belongs to 
the new temporalization as a beginning, and it receives from 
the future which has just arisen its own nature as a beginning. 
It is the future alone in fact which can turn back on the 
pure present in order to qualify it as a beginning; otherwise 
this present would be merely any sort of present whatsoever. 
Thus the present of the choice belongs already, as an integral 
structure, to the newly begun totality. But on ^e other hand, 
it is not possible for this choice not to determine itself in 
connection with the past which it has to be. The choice is 
even, on principle, a decision to apprehend as past the choice 
for which it is substituted. A converted atheist is not simply 
a believer; he is a believer who has for himself rejected 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


601 


atheism, who has made past within him the project of being an 
atheist. Thus the new choice is given as a beginning in so 
far as it is an end and as an end in so far as it is a beginning; 
it is limited by a double nothingness, and as such it realizes a 
break in the ekstatic unity of’ our being. However the instant 
is by itself only a nothingness, for wherever we cast our 
view, we apprehend only a continuous temporalization 
which will be in accordance with the direction in which we 
look: either the completed and closed series which has just 
passed dragging its final term with it — or else the living 
temporalization which is begiiming and whose initial term 
is caught and dragged along by the future possibility. 

Thus every fundamental choice defines the direction of the 
pursued-pursuit at the same time that it temporalizes itself. 
This does not mean that it gives an initial thrust or that there 
is something settled — ^which I can exploit to my profit so 
long as I hold myself within the limits of this choice. On 
the contrary, the nihilation is pursued- continuously, and 
consequentiy the free and continuous recovery of the choice 
is" obligatory. This recovery, however, is not made from 
instant to' instant while I freely reassume my choice. This 
is because there is no instant. The recovery is so narrowly 
joined to the ensemble of the process that it has no instan- 
taneous meaning and can not have any. But precisely 
because it is free and perpetually recovered by freedom, my 
choice is limited by freedom itself; that is, it is haunted by 
the specter of the instant. In so far as I shall reassume my 
choice, the making-past of the process will be effected in 
perfect ontological continuity with the present. The process 
which is made-past remains organized with the present 
nihilation in the form of a practical knowing; that, is, 
meaning which is lived and interiorized without ever being 
an object for the consciousness which projects itself toward 
its own ends. But precisely because I am free I always have 
the possibility of positing my immediate past as an object. 
This means that even though my prior consciousness was 
a pure non-positional consciousness (of) the past while it 
constituted itself as an internal negation of the co-present 
real and made its meaning known to itself by its ends 
posited as “reassumed,” now at the time of the new choice, 
consciousness posits its own past as an object; that is,, it 
evaluates its past and takes its bearings in relation to it. 
This act of objectivizing the immediate past is the same as 



602 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

the new choice of other ends; it contributes to causing the. 
instant to spring forth as the nihilating rupture of the 
temporalization. 

It will be easier for the reader to understand the results 
obtained by this analysis if we compare them to another 
theory of freedom — ^for example, to that of Leibniz, For 
Leibniz as for us, when Adam took the apple it would have 
been possible for him not to take it. But for Leibniz as 
for us the implications of this gesture are so numerous and 
so r amifi ed that ultimately to declare that it would have been 
possible for Adam not to take the apple amounts to saying 
that another Adam would have been possible. Thus Adam’s 
contingency is the same as his freedom since this contingency 
means that this real Adam is surrounded by an infinity 
of possible Adams, each one of whom as compared to the 
real Adam is characterized by a slight or profound alteration 
of all his attributes; that is, ultimately, of his substance. 
For Leibniz, then, the freedom claim^ by human reality 
is as the organization of three difllerent notions: that man 
is free who (1) determines himself rationally to perform 
an act; (2) is such that this act is imderstood fully by the 
very nature of the one who has committed it; (3) is contin- 
gent — that is, exists in such a way that other persons com- 
mitting other acts in connection with the same situation 
would have been possible. But because of the necessary 
connection of possibles, another gesture of Adam would have 
•heen possible only for and by another Adam, and the 
existence of another Adam implies that of another world. 

. We recognize along with Leibniz that Adam’s gesture 
engages his whole person and that another gesture could be 
understood only in the light of and within the compass of 
another persondity in Adam. But Leibniz falls into a necessi- 
tarianism completely opposed to the idea of ireedom when 
at the outset he establishes the assertion of the substance of 
Adam as a premise which will bring in the act of Adam as 
one of its partial conclusions; that is, when he reduces the 
chronological order to being only a symbolic expression of 
the logical order. The result is that on the one hand, the 
act is strictly necessitated by the very essence of Adam; also 
the contingency which according to Leibniz makes freedom 
possible is found wholly contained wi thin the essence of 
Adam. And this essence is not chosen by Adam himself but 
by God. Thus it is true that the act committed by Adam. 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


603 


necessarily derives from Adam’s essence and that it thereby 
depends on Adam himself and on no other, which, to be 
sure, is one condition of freedom. But Adam’s essence is for 
Adam himself a given; Adam has not chosen it; he could 
not choose to be Adam. Consequently he does not support 
the responsibility for his being. Hence once he himself has 
been given, it is of little importance that one can attribute 
to him the relative responsibility for his act. 

For us, on the contrary, Adam is not defined by an essence 
since for human reality essence comes after existence. Adam 
is defined by the choice of his ends; that is, by the upsurge 
of an ekstatic temporalization which has nothing in common 
with the logical order. Thus Adam’s contingency expresses 
the finite choice which he has made of himself. But hence- 
forth what makes his person known to him is the future 
and not the past; he chooses to learn what he is by means 
of ends toward which he projects himself — ^that is, by the 
totality of his tastes, his likes, his hates, etc., inasmuch as 
there is a thematic organization and an inherent meaning 
in this totality. Thus we can avoid the objection which we 
ofliered to Leibniz when we said, “To be sure, Adam chose 
to take the apple, but he did not choose to be Adam.” For 
us, indeed, the problem of freedom is placed on the level 
of Adam’s choice of himself — ^that is, on the determination 
of essence by existence. In addition we recognize with 
Leibniz that another gesture of Adam, implying another 
Adam, implies another world; but by “another world” we 
do not mean a particular organisation of co-possibles such 
that the other possible Adam finds his place there, rather 
that the revelation of another face of the world will corre- 
spond to another being-in-the-world of Adam. 

Finally for Leibniz since the possible gesture of the other 
Adam is organized in another possible world, it pre-exists 
for all eternity — as possible — the realization of the contin- 
gent, real Adam. Here again essence precedes existence for 
Leibniz, and the chronological order depends on the eternal 
order of logic. For us, on the contrary, the possible is only 
a pure and unformed possibility of another being such that 
it is not existed as possible by a new project of Adam toward 
new possibilities. Thus the possible of Leibniz remains 
eternally an abstract possible whereas for us the possible 
appears only by possibilizing itself; that is, by coming to 
announce jo Adam what he is. Consequently the order of 



604 ' BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

psychological explanation in the work of Leibniz goes 
from past to present to the same extent that this succession 
expresses the eternal order of essences; everything is finally 
fixed in a logical eternity, and the only contingency is that 
of principle, which means that Adam is a postulate of the 
divine understanding. For us, on the contrary, the order of 
interpretation is strictly chronological; it does not seek to 
reduce time to a purely logical concatenation {reason') or 
a chronological-logical (cause, determinism). It is inter- 
preted therefore from the standpoint of the future. 

But what we must especially insist on is that our preceding 
analysis is purely theoretical. In theory only, another gesture 
of Adam is possible and only within the limits of the total 
overthrow of the ends by which Adam chooses himself as 
Adam. We have presented things m this way — and hence 
we have been able to seem like Leibnizians — so as to pre- 
sent our view first with the maximum of simplicity. In actual 
fact reality is far more complex. This is because in reality 
the order of interpretation is purely chronological and not 
logical; the understanding of an act in terms of the original 
ends posited by the freedom of the for-itself is not an intel- 
lection. And the descending hierarchy of possibles from 
the final and initial possible to the derived possible which 
we are trying to understand has nothing in common with 
the deductive series which goes from a principle to its 
consequence. First of all, the connection between the derived 
possible (to resist fatigue or to give in to it) and the funda- 
mental possible is not a connection of deductibility. It is 
the connection between a totality and a partial structure. 
The view of the total project enables one to “understand” 
the particular structure considered. But the Gestalt school 
has shown us that the Pragnanz of the total forms does 
not exclude the variability of certain secondary structures. 
There are certain lines which I can add to or subtract from 
a given figure without altering its specific character. There 
are others, on the contrary, which can not be added without 
involving the immediate disappearance of the figure and 
the appearance of another figure. The same thing is true 
with regard to the relation between the secondary possibles 
and the fundamental possible or the formal totality of my 
possibles. The meaning of the secondary possible considered 
refers always, to be sure, to the total meaning which I am. 
But other possibles could have replaced this one without 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM* 


605 


altering the total 'meaning; that is, they could always and 
just as well have indicated this totality as the form which 
enables them to be understood — or in the ontological order 
of realization they could just as well have been projected 
as the means of attaining the totality and in the light of 
this totality. In short the act of understanding is the inter- 
pretation of a factual connection and not the apprehension 
of a necessity. 

Thus the psychological interpretation of our acts must 
frequently return to the Stoic notion of “indifferents.” To 
relieve my fatigue, it is indifferent whether I sit down 
on the side of the road or whether I take a hundred steps 
more in order to stop at the inn which I see from a dis- 
tance. This means that the apprehension of the complex, 
global form which I have chosen as my ultimate possible 
does not sujfice. to account for the choice of one possible rath- 
er than another. There is not here an act deprived of motives 
and causes but rather a spontaneous invention of motives 
and causes, which placed within the compass of my fun- 
damental choice thereby enriches it. In the same way each 
“this” must appear on the groimd of the world and in the 
perspective of my facticity, but neither my facticity nor 
the world allows us to understand why I presently grasp 
this glass rather than this inkwell as a figure raising itself 
on the ground. In relation to these indifferents our freedom 


is entire and unconditioned. This fact of choosing one 
indifferent possible and then abandoning it for another 
will not cause the instant to surge up as the rupture of 
duration*, on the contrary, these free choices are all integrated 


— even if they are successive and contradictory — in the unity 
of my fundamental project. This does not mean that they 
are to be apprehended as gratuitous. In fact whatever they 
may be, they will always be interpreted in terms of the 
ori^al choice; and to the extent that they enrich this 
choice and make it concrete, they will always bring with 
thein their motive — that is, the consciousness of their cause 
or, if you prefer, the apprehension of the situation as artic- 
ulated in this or that way. 

Another thing which will render the strict appreciation 
of the connection between the secondary possible and the 
fundamental possible particidarly delicate is the t 
there exists no a pr\p\ “ready-reckoner” to 
refer in or ■' ine this connection. ^ 




606 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


trary, it is the for-itself which chooses to consider the 
secondary possible as indicative of the fundamental possible. 
Just where we have the impression that the free subject is 
turning his back on his fundamental goal, we often intro- 
duce the observer’s coefficient of error; that is,' we use our 
own scales to weigh the relation between the act considered 
and the final ends. But the for-itself in its freedom invents 
not only primary and secondary ends; by the same stroke it 
invents the whole system of interpretation which allows their 
interconnections. In no case can there be a question of estab- 
lishing a system of universal understanding of the secondary 
possibles in terms of the primary possibles: in every instance 
the subject himself must furnish his touchstone and his 
personal criteria. 

Finally the for-itself can make voluntary decisions which 
are opposed to the fundamental ends which it has chosen. 
These decisions can be only voluntary — that is, reflective. 
In fact they can derive only from an error committed either 
in good faith or in bad faith against the ends which I 
pursue, and this error can be committed only if the ensemble 
of motives which I am are discovered in the capacity of an 
object by the reflective consciousness. Since the unreflective 
consciousness is a spontaneous self-projection toward its 
possibilities, it can never be deceived about itself; one must 
take care not to hold it responsible for making a mistake 
regarding itself when the error is actually a false evaluation of 
the objective situation — an error which can bring into the 
world consequences absolutely opposed to those which the 
unreflective consciousness wanted to effect, without however 
there having been any misunderstanding of its proposed 
ends. The reflective attitude, on the contrary, involves a 
thousand possibilities of - error, not in that it apprehends 
the pure motive — i,e., the consciousness reflected-on — as ■ a 
quasi-object but in so far as it aims at constituting across 
that consciousness reflected-on veritable psychic objects 
which are only probable objects, as we have seen in Part 
Two, Chapter Tliree, and which can even be false objects. It is 
therefore possible for me a& regards errors concerning my- 
self to impose upon myself reflectively — i.e., on the volun- 
tary plane — projects which contradict my initial project 
without, however, fundamentally modifying the initial proj- 
ect. Thus, for example, if my initial project aims at choosing 
myself as inferior in the nudst of others (what is called 



BEING AND -DOING: FREEDOM 


607 


the inferiority complex), and if stuttering, for example, is 
a behavior which is understood and interpreted in terms of 
the primary project, I can for social reasons and through a 
misunderstanding of my own choice of inferiority decide 
to cure myself of stuttering. I can even succeed in it, 
yet without having ceased to feel myself and to will myself 
to be inferior. In fact I can obtain a result by using merely 
technical methods. This is what we usually call a voluntary 
self-reform. But these results will only displace the infirmity 
from which I suffer; another will arise in its place and will 
in its own way express the total end which I pursue. As this 
profound inefficacy of a voluntary act directed on itself may 
surprise us, we are going to analyze the chosen example more 
closely. 

It should be observed first of all that the choice of total 
ends although totally free is not necessarily nor even frequent- 
ly made in joy. We must not confuse our necessity of 
choosing with the will to power. The choice can be effected 
in resignation or uneasiness; it can be a flight; it can be 
realized in bad faith. We can choose ourselves as fleeing, 
inapprehensible, as indecisive, etc. We can even choose not 
to choose ourselves. In these various instances, ends are 
posited beyond a factual situation, and the responsibility for 
these ends falls on us. Whatever our being may be, it is a 
choice; and it depends on us to choose ourselves as “great” 
or “noble” or “base” and “humiliated.” If we have chosen 
humiliation as the very stuff of our being, we shall realize 
ourselves as humiliated, embittered, inferior, etc. We are 
not dealing here with givens with no further meaning. 
But the man who realizes himself as humiliated thereby 
constitutes himself as a means of attaining certain ends: the 
humiliation chosen can be, for example, identified like mas- 
ochism with an instrument designed to free us from existence- 
for-itself; it can be a project of getting rid of our anguishing 
freedom to the advantage of others; our project can be to 
cause our being-for-itself to be entirely absorbed by our 
being-for-others. At all events the “inferiority complex” can 
arise only if it is founded on a free apprehension of our 
being-for-others. This being-for-others as a situation will 
act in the capacity of a cause, but all the same it must 
be discovered by a motive which is nothing but our free 
project. Thus the inferiority which is felt and lived is the 
chosen instrument to make us comparable to a thing; that 



608 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


is, to make us exist as a pure outside in the midst of the 
world. But it is evident that it must be lived in accordance 
with the nature which we confer on it by this choice — i.e., 
in shame, anger, and bitterness. Thus to choose inferiority 
does not mean to be sweetly contented with an aurea 
mediocritas; it is to produce and to assume the rebellion and 
despair which constitute the revelation of this inferiority. 
For example, I can persist in manifesting myself in a certain 
kind of employment because I am inferior in it, whereas 
in some other field I could without difficulty show myself 
equal to the average. It is this fruitless effort which I have 
chosen, simply because it is fruitless — either because I prefer 
to be the last rather than to be lost in the mass or because 
I have chosen discouragement and shame as the best means 
of attaining being. 

It is obvious, however, that I can choose as a field of 
action the province in which I am inferior only if this choice 
implies the reflective will to be superior there. To choose to 
be an inferior artist is of necessity to wish to be a great artist; 
otherwise the inferiority would be neither suffered nor recog- 
nized. To choose to be a modest artisan in no way implies 
the pursuit of inferiority; it is a simple example of the choice 
of finitude. On the contrary, the choice of inferiority implies 
the constant realization of a gap between the end pursued by 
the will and the end obtained. The artist who wishes to be 
great and who chooses to be inferior intentionally maintains 
this gap; he is like Penelope and destroys by night what he 
makes by day. Thus with his artistic realizations he maintains 
himself constantly on the voluntary level and hence displays a 
desperate energy. But, this very will is in bad faith; that is, 
-it flees the recognition' of the true ends chosen by the- spon- 
taneous consciousness, and it constitutes false psychic objects 
as motives in order to be able to deliberate concerning these 
motives and to determine itself in terms of them (the 
love of glory, the love of the beautiful, etc.). The will here 
is by no means opposed to the fundamental choice; quite the 
contrary it is understood in its end and in its fundamental bad 
faith only within the perspective of a fundamental choice of in- 
feriority. Whereas in the form of reflective consciousness the 
will constitutes in bad faith false psychic objects as motives, on 
the other hand in the capacity of a non-reflective and non- 
thetic self-consciousnessi it is consciousness (of) being in 
bad faith and consequently (of) the fundamental project 



609 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 

pursued by the for-itself. Thus the divorce between the 
spontaneous and willed consciousness is not a purely estab- 
lished factual given. On the contrary this duality is projected 
and initially realized by our fundamental freedom; it is con- 
ceived only in and through the profound unity of our funda- 
mental project, which is to choose ourselves as inferior. But 
precisely, this divorce implies that the voluntary deliberation 
decides in bad faith to offset or to hide our inferiority by 
means of works whose inner goal is actually to enable _ us 
on the contrary to measure this inferiority. 

Thus, as is seen, our analysis enables us to accept the 
two levels on which Adler places the inferiority complex: 
like him we admit a fundamental recognition of this inferi- 
ority, and like him we admit a heavy and ill-balanced develop- 
ment of acts, words, and statements designed to offset 
or to hide this deep feeling. But there are these differ- 
ences: (1) We do not allow ourselves to conceive of the 
fundamental recognition as unconscious; it is so far from 
being unconscious that it even constitutes the bad faith of 
the will. Due to this fact we do not establish between the 
two levels considered the difference between the uncon- 
scious and the conscious, but rather that which separates the 
fundamental unreflective consciousness and its tributary, the 
consciousness reflected-on. (2) It seems to us that the con- 
cept of bad faith — as we established in Part One — should 
replace those of the censor, repression, and the uncon- 
scious which Adler uses. (3) The unity of the consciousness 
such as it is revealed to the cogito is too profound for us 
to admit a division into two levels unless the unity is re- 
covered by a more profound synthetic intention leading froih 
one level to the other and unifying them. Consequently 
we feel that there is something of deeper significance than 
the inferiority complex itself; not only is the inferiority 
complex recognized, but this recognition is a choice. Not 
only does the will seek to hide this inferiority by means 
of shifting and feeble affirmations; a more profound inten- 
tion traverses it and chooses precisely the feebleness and 
shiftiness of these affirmations with the intention of ren- 
dering more noticeable this inferiority which we claim to 
flee and which we shall experience in shame and in the feeling 
of failure. Thus the man who suffers from Minderwertigkeit 
has chosen to be his own tormentor. He has chosen shame 
and suffering, which does not mean, however, that he is to 



610 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


experience any joy when they are most forcefully realized. 

But if these new possibles are chosen in bad faith by a 
will which is produced within the limits of our initial proj- 
ect, they must nevertheless be realized to a certain extent 
against the initial project. To the extent that we wish 
to hide our inferiority from ourselves precisely in order 
to create it, we can wish to overcome the timidity and the 
stuttering which on the spontaneous level manifest our 
initial project of inferiority. We shall then undertake a 
systematic and reflective effort to cause these manifestations 
to disappear. We make this attempt in the state of mind 
of patients who come to consult the^ psychoanalyst. That is, 
on the one hand we work for an achievement which on the 
other hand we refuse. Thus the patient decides voluntarily to 
come to consult the psychoanalyst in order to be cured of 
certain troubles which he can no longer hide, from himself; 
and by the mere fact that he puts himself in the hands of 
the physician he runs the risk of being cured. But on 
the other hand, if he runs this risk, it is in order to persuade 
himself that he has in vain done everything possible in order to 
be cured and that therefore he is incurable. Hence he ap- 
proaches the psychoanalytic treatment with bad faith and bad 
will. All his efforts will have as their goal causing the attempt 
to fail although he voluntarily continues to lend himself 
to the enterprise. Similarly the psychasthenics whom Janet 
studied suffer from an obsession which they intentionally 
enter into and wish to be cured of. But, to be precise, 
their will to be cured has for its goal the confirmation 
of these obsessions as sufferings and consequently the reali- 
zation of them in all their strength. We know the result: 
the patient can not confess his obsessions; he lies sobbing 
on the floor, but he does not determine himself to make the 
requisite confession. It would be useless to speak here of a 
struggle between the will and the disease; these processes 
unfold within the ekstatic unity of bad faith in a being 
who is what he is not and who is not what he is. Similarly 
when the psychoanalyst is close to grasping the initial proj- 
ect ^ of the patient, the latter abandons the treatment ' or 
begins to lie. It would be useless to try to explain this resis- 
tance by a revolt or an unconscious anxiety. How then could 
the unconscious be informed of the progress of the psy- 
choanalytical investigation unless precisely by being a con- 
sciousness? But if the patient plays the game to the end. 



611 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 

it is necessary that he experience a partial cure; that is, 
there must be produced in him the disappearance of the 
morbid phenomena which have brought him to seek the 
help of the physician. Thus he will have chosen the lesser 
evil: having come in order to persuade himself that he 
is incurable, he is forced — ^in order to avoid apprehending 
his project in full light and consequently having to nihilate 
it and to become freely another project — he is forced to 
depart in full possession of the cure. Similarly the methods 
which I shall employ to cure myself of stuttering and of 
timi dity may have been attempted in bad faith. Nonetheless 
the fact remains that I have been forced to recognize their 
efiS-cacy. In this case the timidity and the stuttering will 
disappear; it is the lesser evil. An artificial and voluble 
assurance will come to replace them. But it is the same with 
these cures as it is with the cure of hysteria by electric shock 
treatment. We know that this therapy can effect the disappear- 
ance of an hysterical contraction of the leg, but as one will 
see, some time later the contraction will appear in the arm. 
This is because the hysteria can be cured only as a totality, 
for it is a total project of the for-itself. Partial medications 
only succeed in displacing the manifestations. Thus the cure 
of the timidity or of the stuttering is consented to and 
chosen in a project which extends to the appearance of 
other troubles — for example, to the realization of a foolish 
and equally unbalanced self-assurance. 

Since the upsurge of a voluntary decision finds its motive 
in the fundamental free choice of my ends, it can attack 
these ends in appearance only. It is therefore only within 
the compass of my fundamental project that the will can 
be efficacious; and I can be “freed” from my “inferiority 
complex” only by a radical modification of my project which 
could in no way find its causes and its motives in the prior 
project, not even in the suffering and shame which I 
experience, for the latter are designed expressly to realize 
my project of inferiority. Thus so long as I am “in” 
the inferiority complex, I can not even conceive of the possi- 
bUity of getting out of it. Even if I dream of getting out 
of it, the precise function of this dream is to make me experi- 
ence even further the abjection of my state; it can be inter- 
preted therefore only in and through the intention which 
makes me inferior. Yet at each moment I apprehend this 
mitial choice as contingent and unjustifiable; at each mo- 



612 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ment therefore I am on the site suddenly to consider it 
objectively and consequently to surpass it and to make- 
it-past by causing the liberating instant to arise. Hence my 
anguish, the fear which I have of being suddenly exor- 
cized (i.e., of becoming radically other); but hence also 
the frequent upsurge of “conversions” which cause me totally 
to metamorphose my original project These conversions, 
which have not been studied by philosophers, have often in- 
spired novelists.*- One may recall the instant at which Gide’s 
Philoctetes casts off his hate, his fundamental project, his 
reason for being, and his being. One may recall the instant 
when Raskolnikoff decides to give himself up. These extra- 
ordinary and marvelous instants when the prior project col- 
lapses into the past in the light of a new project which rises 
on its ruins and which as yet exists only in outline, in which 
humiliation, anguish, joy, hope are delicately blended, in 
which we let go in order to grasp and grasp in order to let 
go — these have often appeared to furnish the clearest and 
most moving image of our freedom. But they are only one 
among others of its many manifestations. 

Thus presented, the “paradox" of the inefficacy of 
voluntary decisions will appear less offensive. It amounts 
to saying that by means of the will, we can construct our- 
selves entirely, but that the will which presides over this 
construction finds its meaning in the original project which 
it can appear to deny, that consequently this construction 
has a function wholly different from that which it advertises, 
and that finally it can reach only details of structures and 
will never modify the original project from which it has 
issued any more than the consequences of a theorem can 
turn back against it and change it. 

At the end of this long discussion, it seems that we 
have succeeded in making a little more precise our onto- 
logical understanding of freedom. It will be well at present 
to gather together and summarize the various results ob- 
tained. 

(1) A first glance at human reality informs us that for it 
being is reduced to doing. The psychologists of the nineteenth 
century who pointed out the “motor" structures of drives, 
of the^ attention, of perception, etc., were right. But motion 
itself is an act. Thus we find no given in human reality in 

V Tr. Sartre seems not to have read or to have forgotten William JameSi 
The Varieiies of Religious Experience^ 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 613 

the sense that temperament, character, passions, principles 
of reason would be acquired or innate data existing in the 
manner of things. The empirical consideration of the human 
being shows him as an organized unity of conduct patterns 
or of “behaviors.” To be ambitious, cowardly, or irritable 
is simply to conduct oneself in this or that manner in this 
or that circumstance. The Behaviorists were right in con- 
sidering that the sole positive psychological study ought to 
be of conduct in strictly defined situations. Just as the 
work of Janet and the Gestalt school have put us in a posi- 
tion to discover types of emotional conduct, so we ought to 
speak of types of perceptive conduct since perception is never 
conceived outside an attitude with respect to the world. 
Even the disinterested attitude of the scientist, as Heidegger 
has shown, is the assumption of a disinterested position 
with regard to the object and consequently one conduct among 
others. Thus human reality does not exist first in order to 
act later; but for human reality, to be is to act, and to cease 
to act is to cease to be. 

(2) But if human reality is action, this means evidently 
that its determination to action is itself action. If we reject 
this principle, and if we admit that human reality can 
be determined to action by a prior state of the world of of 
itself, this amounts to putting a given at the beginning of 
the series. Then these acts disappear as acts in order to 
give place to a series of movements. Thus the notion of con- 
duct is itself destroyed with Janet and with the Behavior- 
ists. The existence of the act implies its autonomy. 

(3) Furthermore, if the act is not pure motion, it must 
be defined by an intention. No matter how this intention 
is considered, it can be only a surpassing of the given toward 
a result to be obtained. This given, in fact, since it is pure 
presence, can not get out of itself. Precisely because it is, 
it is fully and solely what it is. Therefore it can not provide 
the reason for a phenomenon which derives all its meaning 
from a result to be attained; that is, from a non-existent 
When the psychologists, for example, view the drive as a 
factual^ state, they do not see that they are removing from 
It all its character as an appetite (ad-petitio) . In fact, if 
the sexual drive can be differentiated from the desire 
to sleep, for example, this can be only by means of its end, 
and this end does not exist. Psychologists ought to have 
asked what could be the ontological structure of a phenomenon 



614 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

such that it makes known to itself what it is by means of 
something which does not yet exist. The intention, which 
is the fundamental structure of human-reality, can in no case 
be explained by a given, not even if it is presented as an 
emanation from a given. But if one wishes to interpret the 
intention by its end, care must be taken not to confer on 
this end an existence as a given. In fact if we could admit 
that the end is given prior to the result to be attained it 
would then be necessary to concede to this end a sort 
of being-in-itself at the heart of its nothingness and an 
attractive virtue of a truly magical type. Moreover we should 
not succeed any better in understanding the connection 
between a given human reality and a given end than in 
understanding the connection between consciousness-substance 
and reality-substance in the realists’ arguments. If the 
drive or the act is to be interpreted by its end, this is because 
the intention has for its structure positing its end outside 
itself. Thus the intention makes itself be by choosing the 
end which makes it known. 

(4) Since the intention is a choice of the end and since 
the world reveals itself across our conduct, it is the intentional 
choice of the end which reveals the world, and the world 
is revealed as this or that (in this or that order) according 
to the end chosen. The end, illunoinating the world, is a 
state of the world to be obtained and not yet existing. The 
intention is a thetic consciousness of the end. But it can 
be so only by making itself a non-thetic consciousness of its 
own possibility. Thus my end can be a good meal if I am 
hungry. But this meal which beyond the dusty road on which 
I am traveling is projected as the meaning of this road (it 
goes toward a hotel where the table is set, where the 
dishes are prepared, where I am expected, etc.) can be 
apprehended only correlatively with my non-thetic project 
toward my own possibility of eating this meal. Thus by a 
double but unitary upsurge the intention illuminates the 
world in terms of an end not yet existing and is itself defined 
by the choice of its possible. My end is a certain objective 
state of the world, my possible is a certain structure of my 
subjectivity; the one is revealed to the thetic consciousness, 
the other flows back over the non-thetic consciousness in 
order to characterize it. 

(5) If the given can not explain the intention, it is neces- 
sary that the intention by its very upsurge realize a rupture 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 615, 

with the given, whatever this may be. Such must be the case, 
for otherwise we should have a present plenitude succeeding 
in continuity" a present plenitude, and we could not pre- 
figure the future. Moreover, this rupture is necessary for 
the appreciation of the given. The given, in fact, could 
never be a cause for an action if it were not appreciated. 
But this appreciation can be realized only by a withdrawal 
in relation to the given, a putting of the given into paren- 
theses, which exactly supposes a break in continuity. In 
addition, the appreciation, if it is not to be gratuitous, must 
be effected in the light of something. And this something 
which serves to appreciate the given can be only the end. 
Thus the intention by a single unitary upsurge posits the 
end, chooses itself, and appreciates the given in terms of 
the end. Under these conditions the given is appreciated in 
terms of something which does not yet exist; it is in the 
light of non-being that being-in-itself is illuminated. There 
results a double nihilating coloration of the given: on the 
one hand, it is nihilated in that the rupture makes it lose 
all efficacy over the intention; on the other hand, it under- 
goes a new nihilation due to the fact that efficacy is returned 
to itjn terms of a nothingness appreciation. Since human 
reality is act, it can be conceived only as being at its core 
a rupture with the given. It is the being which causes there 
to be a given by breaking with it and illuminating it in the 
light of the not-yet-existing. 

(6) The necessity on the part of the given to appear only 
within the compass of a nihilation which reveals it is actu- 
ally the same as the internal negation which we de- 
scribed in Part Two. It would be in vain to imagine that 
consciousness can exist without a given; in that case it 
would be consciousness (of) itself as consciousness of 
nothing — that is, absolute nothingness. But if .consciousness 
exists in terms of the given, this does not mean that the 
given conditions consciousness; consciousness is a pure and 
simple negation of the given, and it exists as the disengage- 
ment from a certain existing given and as an engagement 
toward a certain not yet existing end. But in addition this in- 
ternal negation can be only the fact of a being which is in per- 
petu^ withdrawal in relation to itself. If this being were 
not Its own negation, it would be what it is — i.e., a pure 
and simple given. Due to this fact it would have no connec- 
tion with any other datum since the given is by nature 



616 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


only what it is. Thus any possibility of the appearance of 
a world would be excluded. In order not to be a given, the 
for-itself must perpetually constitute itself as. in withdrawal 
in relation to itself; that is, it must leave itself behind it 
as a datum which it already no longer is. This character- 
istic of the for-itself implies that it is the being which finds 
no help, no pillar of support in what it was. But on the 
other hand, the for-itself is free and can cause there to 
be a world because the for-itself is the being which has to 
be what it was in the light of what it will be. Therefore the 
freedom of the for-itself appears as its being. But since 
this freedom is neither a given nor a property, it can 
be only by choosing itself. The freedom of the for-itself is 
always engaged; there is no question here of a freedom 
which could be undetermined and which would pre-exist 
its choice. We shall never apprehend ourselves except as a 
choice in the making. But freedom is simply the fact that 
this choice is always unconditioned. 

(7) Such a choice made without base of support and 
dictating its own causes to itself, can very well appear absurd, 
and in fact it is absurd. This is because freedom is a 
choice of its being but not the foundation of its being. We 
shall return to this relation between freedom and facticity 
in the course of this chapter. For the moment it will suffice 
us to say that human-reality can choose itself as it intends 
but is not able not to choose itself. It can not even refuse to 
be; suicide, in fact, is a choice and affirmation — of being. 
By this being which is given to it, human reality partici- 
pates in the universal contingency of being and thereby in 
what we may call absurdity. This choice is absurd, not be- 
cause it is without reason but because there has never been 
any possibility of not choosing oneself. Whatever the choice 
may be, it is founded and reapprehended by being, for it is 
choice which w.-But what must be noted here is that this 
choice is not absurd in the sense in which in a rational 
universe a phenomenon might arise which would not be 
bound to others by any reasons. It is absurd in this sense— 
that the choice is that by which all foundations and all rea- 
sons come into being, that by which the very notion of the 
absurd receives a meaning. It is absurd as being beyond all 
reasons. Thus freedom is not pure and simple contingency 
in so far as it turns back toward its being in order to illumi- 
nate its being in the light of its end. It is the perpetual escape 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 617 

from contingency; it is the interiorization, the nihilatwn, 
and the subjectivizing of contingency, which thus modified 
passes wholly into the gratuity of the choice. 

(8) The free project is fundamental, for it is my bemg. 
Neither ambition nor the passion to be loved nor the ittferi- 
ority complex can be considered as fundamental projects. 
On the contrary, they of necessity must be understood in 
terms of a primary project which is recognized as the project 
which can no longer be interpreted in terms of any other 
and which is total. A special phenomenological method will 
be necessary in order to make this initial project explicit. This 
is what we shall call existential psychoanalysis. We shall 
speak of this in the next chapter. For the present we can 
say that the fundamental project which I am is a project 
concerning not my relations with this or that particular 
object in the world, but my total being-in-the-world; since 
the world itself is. revealed only in the light of an end, this 
project posits for its end a certain type of relation to 
being which the for-itself wills to adopt. This project is not 
instantaneous, for it can not be “in” time. Neither is it 
non-temporal in order to “give time to itself” afterwards. 
That is why we reject Kant’s “choice of intelligible character.” 
The structure of the choice necessarily implies that it be a, 
choice in the world. A choice which would be a choice in 
terms of nothing, a choice against nothing, would be a choice 
of nothing and would be annihilated as choice. There is, only 
phenomenal choice, provided that we understand that the 
phenomenon is here the absolute. But in its very upsurge, 
&e choice is temporalized since it causes a future to come to 
illuminate the present and to constitute it as a present by 
giving the meaning of pastness to the in-itself “data.” How- 
ever we need not understand by this that the fundamental 
project is co-extensive with the entire “life” of the for-itself. 
Since freedom is a being-without-support and without-a- 
springboard, the project in order to be must be constantly 
renewed, I choose myself perpetually and can never be 
merely by virtue of having-been-chosen; otherwise I should 
tall into the pure and simple existence of the in-itself. The 
necessity of perpetually choosing myself is one with the 
pursued-pursuit which I am. But precisely because here we 
are dealing with a choice, this choice as it is made indicates 
in general other choices as possibles. The possibility of these 
tner choices is neither made explicit nor posited, but -it is 



618 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

lived in the feeling of unjustifiability; and it is this which 
is expressed by the fact of the absurdity of my choice 
and consequently of my being. Thus my freedom eats away 
my freedom. Since I am free, I project my total possible, but 
I thereby posit that I am free and that I can always nihilate 
this first project and make it past 

Thus at the moment at which the for-itself thinks to 
apprehend itself and make known to itself by a projected 
nothingness what it is, it escapes itself; for it thereby posits 
that it can be other than it is. It will be enough for it to 
make explicit its unjustifiability in order to cause the instant 
to arise; that is, the appearance of a new project on the col- 
lapse of the former. Nevertheless this upsurge of the new 
project has for its express condition the nihilation of the for- 
mer, and hence the for-itself can not confer on itself a new 
existence. As soon as it rejects the project which has lapsed 
into the past, it has to be this project in the form of the “was”; 
this means that this lapsed project belongs henceforth to the 
for-itself’s situation. No law of being can assign an a priori 
number to the different projects which I am. The existence 
of the for-itself in fact conditions its essence. But it is 
necessary to consult each man’s history in order to get from it 
a particular idea with regard to each individual for-itself. 
Our particular projects, aimed at the realization in the world 
of a particular end, are united in the global project which 
we ’are. But precisely because we are wholly choice and act, 
these partial projects are not determined by ^e global project 
They must themselves be choices; and a certain margin of 
contingency, of unpredictability, 'and of the absurd is 
allowed to each of them although each project as it is pro- 
jected is the specification of the global project on the occa- 
sion of particular elements in the situation and so is always 
understood in relation to the totality of my being-in-the- 
world. 

With these few observations we think that we have de- 
scribed the freedom of the for-itself in its original existence. 
But it will have been observed that this freedom requires 
a given, not as its condition but for other sound reasons. 
First, freedom is conceived only as the nihilation of a 
given (5); and to the extent that it is an internal negation 
and a consciousness, it participates (6) in the necessity which 
prescribes that consciousness be consciousness of something. 
In addition freedom is the freedom of choosing but not 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 619 

the freedom of not choosing. Not to choose is, in fact, to 
choose not to choose. The result is that the choice is the 
foundation of being-chosen but not the foundation of choos- 
ing. Hence the absurdity (7) of freedom. There again we 
are referred to a given which is none other than the very 
facticity of the for-itself. Finally the global project while 
illuminating the world in its totality can be made specific 
on the occasion of this or that element of the situation and 
consequently of the contingency of the world. All these 
remarks therefore refer us to a difficult problem: that 
of the relation of freedom to facticity. Moreover we shall 
inevitably meet other concrete objections. Can I choose to 
be tall if I am short? To have two arms if I have only one? 
Etc. These depend on the “limitations” which my Factual 
situation would impose on my free choice of myself. It will 
be well therefore to examine the other aspect of freedom, 
its “reverse side”; its relation to facticity. 


n. FREEDOM AND FACTICITY: THE 
' SITUATION 

The decisive argument which is employed by common sense 
against freedom consists in reminding us of our impotence. 
Far from being able to modify our situation at our whim, we 
seem to be unable to change ourselves. I am not “free” either 
to escape the lot of my class, of my nation, of my family, or 
even to build up my own power or my fortune or to 
conquer my most insignificant appetites or habits. I am born a 
worker, a Frenchman, an hereditary syphilitic, or a tubercular. 
The history of a life, whatever it may be, is the history of a 
failure. 'The coefficient of adversity of things is such that years 
of patience are necessary to obtain the feeblest result. Again 
it is necessary “to obey nature in order to command it”; that 
is, to insert my action into the network of determinism. Much 
more than he appears “to make himself,” man seems “to be 
made” by climate and the earth, race and class, language, 
the history of the collectivity of which he is a part, heredity, 
the individual circumstances of his childhood, acquired 
ha^s, the great and small events of his life. 

This argument has never greatly troubled the partisans of 
Descartes, first of all, recognized bo 
tne will IS infinite and that it is necessary “ 



620 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ourselves rather than fortune.” Here certain distinctions 
ought to be made. Many of the facts set forth by the deter- 
minists do not actually deserve to enter, into our considera- 
tions. In particular the coefficient of adversity in things can 
not be an argument against our freedom, for it is by us— 
i.e., by the preliminary positing of an end — that this coeffi- 
cient of adversity arises. A particular crag, which manifests a 
profound resistance if I wish to displace it, will be on the 
contrary a valuable aid if I want to climb upon it in order to 
look over the countryside. In itself — if one can even imagine 
what the crag can be in itself — it is neutral; that is, it waits to 
be illuminated by an end in order to manifest itself as adverse 
or helpful. Again it can manifest itself in one or the other way 
only within an instrumental-complex which is already es- 
tablished. Without picks and piolets, paths already worn, 
and a technique of climbing, the crag would be neither easy 
nor difficult to climb; the question would not be posited, it 
would not support any relation of any kind with the technique 
of mountain climbing. Thus although brute things (what 
Heidegger calls “brute existents”) can from the start limit 
our freedom of action, it is our freedom itself which must first 
constitute the framework, the technique, and the ends in 
relation to which they will manifest themselves as limits. Even 
if the crag is revealed as “too difficult to climb,” and if we 
must give up the ascent, let us note that the crag is revealed 
as such only because it was originally grasped as “climba- 
ble”; it is therefore our freedom which constitutes the limits 
which it will subsequently encounter. 

Of course, even after all these observations, there remains 
an unnamable and unthinkable residuum which belongs to the 
in-itself considered and which is responsible for the fact that 
in a world illuminated by our freedom, this particular crag 
will be more favorable for scaling and that one not. But this 
residue is far from being originally a limit for freedom; in 
fact, it is thanks to this residue — ^that is, to the brute in- 
itself as such — that freedom arises as freedom. Indeed 
common sense will agree with us that the being who is said 
to be free is the one who can realize his projects. But in order 
for the act to be able to allow a realization, the simple projec- 
tion of a possible end must be distinguished a priori from the 
realization of this end. If conceiving is enough for realizing, 
then I am plunged in a world like that of a dream in which 
the possible is no longer in any way distinguished from the real. 



'being and DOING: FREEDOM 621 

I am condemned henceforth to see the world modified at 
whim of the changes of my consciousness; ! can not practice 
in relation to my conception the “putting into brackets and 
the suspension of judgment which will distinguish a simple 
fiction from a real choice. If the object appears as soon as it 
is simply conceived, it will no longer be chosen or merely 
wished for. Once the distinction between the simple wish, 
the representation which I could choose, and the choice is 
abolished, freedom disappears too. We are free when the final 
term by which we make known to ourselves what we are is 
an end; that is, not a real existent like that which in the- 
supposition which we have made could fulfill our wish, but 
an object which does not yet exist. But consequenfiy this end 
can be transcendent only if it is separated from us at the same 
time that it is accessible. Only an ensemble of real existents 
can separate us from this end — ^in the same way that this end 
can be conceived only as a state to-come of the real existents 
which separate me from it. It is nothing but the outline of an 
order of existents — ^that is, a series of dispositions to be 
assumed by existents on the foundation of their actual rela- 
tions. By the internal negation, in fact, the for-itself illumi- 
nates the existents in their mutual relations by means of the 
end which it posits, and it projects this end in terms of the 
determination which it apprehends in the existent. There 
is no circle, as we have seen, for the upsurge of the for-itself 
is efiected at one stroke. But if this is the case, then the very 
order of the existents is indispensable to freedom itself. It is 
by means of them that freedom is separated from and re- 
united to the end which it pursues and which makes known 
to it what it is. Consequently the resistance which freedom 
reveals in the existent, far from being a danger to freedom, 
results only in enabling it to arise as freedom. There can be a 
free for-itself only as engaged in a resisting world. Outside of 
this engagement the notions of freedom, of determinism, of 
necessity lose all meaning. 

^ necessary to point out to “common sense” 
that.&e formula “to be free” does not mean “to obtain what 
one has wished” but rather “by oneself to determine oneself to 

choosing). In other words 
nnnnc^ iniportant to freedom. The discussion which 

pMosophers stems here from a 

“freedom” popular concept of 

om which has been produced by historical, polifical. 



622 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

and moral circumstances is equivalent to "the ability to obtain 
the ends chosen.” The technical and philosophical concept of 
freedom, the only one which we are considering here, means 
only the autonomy of choice. It is necessary, however, to note 
that the choice, being identical with acting, supposes a 
commencement of realization in order that the choice may be 
distinguished from the dream and the wish. Thus we shall not 
say that a prisoner is always free to go out of prison, which 
would be absurd, nor that he is always free to long for release, 
which would be an irrelevant truism, but that he is always 
free to try to escape (or get himself liberated); that is, that 
whatever his condition may be, he can project his escape and 
learn the value of his project by undertaking some action. Our 
description of freedom, since it does not distinguish between 
choosing and doing, compels us to abandon at once the dis- 
tinction between the intention and the act. The intention can 
no more be separated from the act than thought can be 
separated from the language which expresses it; and as it 
happens that our speech informs us of our thought, so our 
acts will inform us of our intentions — that is, it will enable 
us to disengage our intentions, to schematize them, and to 
make objects of them instead of limiting us to living them — 
i.e., to assume a non-thetic consciousness of them. This essen- 
tial distinction between the jfreedom of choice and the free- 
dom of obtaining was certainly perceived by Descartes, follow- 
ing Stoicism. It puts an end to all arguments based on the 
distinction between “willing” and “being able,” which are 
still put forth today by the partisans and the opponents of 
freedom. 

It is nonetheless true that freedom encounters or seems to 
encounter limitations on account of the given which it sur- 
passes or nihilates. To show that the coefficient of adversity of 
the thing and its character as an obstacle (joined to its charac- 
ter as an instrument) is indispensable to the existence of a 
freedom is to use an argument that cuts two ways; for while it 
enables us to establish that freedom is not invalidated by the 
given, it indicates, on the other hand, something like an 
ontological conditioning of freedom. Would it not be reason- 
able to say, along with certain contemporary philosophers: if 
no obstacle, then no freedom? And as we can not admit that 
freedom by itself creates its own obstacle — ^which would be 
absurd for anyone who has understood the meaning of' 
spontaneity — there seems to be here a kind of ontological 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


623 


priority'of the in-itself over the for-itself. Therefore we must 
consider the previous remarks as simple attempts to clear &e 
ground, and we must take up again from the begmmng the 

^^We°ha4^^itaSshed that the for-itself is free. But this 
does not mean that it is its own foundation. If to be free 
meant to be its own foundation, it would be necessary that 
freedom should decide the existence of its being. And this 
necessity can be understood in two ways. First it would be 
necessary that freedom should decide its being-free, that is, 
not only that it should be a choice of an end, but that it 
diould be a choice of itself as freedom. This would suppose 
therefore that the possibility of being-free and the possibility 
of not-being-free exist equally before the free choice of 
either one of them — i.e., before the free choice of freedom. 
But since then a previous freedom would be necessary which 
would choose to be free — Le., basically, which would 
choose to be what it is already — vfQ should be referred 
to infinity; for there would be need of another prior freedom 
in order to choose this and so on. In fact we are a freedom 
which chooses, but we do not choose to be free. We are con- 
demned to freedom, as we said earlier, thrown into freedom 
or, as Heidegger says, “abandoned.” And we can see that this 
abandonment has no other origin than the very existence of 
freedom. If, therefore, freedom is defined as the escape from 
the given, from fact, then there is a fact of escape from fact. 
This is the facticity of freedom. 

But the fact that freedom is not its own foundation can 
be understood also in another way which will lead to identi- 
cal conclusions. Actually if freedom decided the existence of 
its being, it would be necessary not only that my being not- 
free should be possible, but necessary as well that my abso- 
lute non-existence be possible. In other words, we have seen 
that in the initial project of freedom the end turns back upon 
causes in order to constitute them as such; but if freedom is 
to be its own foundation, then the end must in addition turn 
back on its existence and cause it to arise. We can see what 
woifid result from this: the for-itself would itself derive from 

which it proposes to 
existence made legitimate by means of its end 
« ^^^ence by right but not in fact. And it is true that 




624 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


is one which consists in trying to make itself recognized by 
the Other as an existence by right. We insist on our indi- 
vidual rights only within the compass of a vast project which 
would tend to confer existence on us in terms of the function 
which we fulfill. This is the reason why man -tries so often to - 
identify himself with his function and seeks to see in himself 
only the “Presiding Judge of the Court of Appeal,” the “Chief 
Treasurer and Paymaster,” etc. Each of these functions has its 
existence justified by its end. To be identified with one of 
them is to take one’s own existence as saved from contin- 
gency. But these efforts to escape original contingency succeed 
only in better establishing the existence of this contingency. 
Freedom can not determine its existence by the end which it 
posits. Of course it exists only by the choice which it makes 
of an end, but it is not master of the fact that there is a free- 
dom which makes known to itself what it is by means of its 
end. A freedom which would produce its own existence 
would lose its very meaning as freedom. Actually freedom is 
not a simple undetermined power. If it were, it would be 
nothingness or in-itself; and it is only by an aberrant synthe- 
sis of the in-itself and nothingness that one is able to con- 
ceive of freedom as a bare power pre-existing its choices. It 
determines itself by its very upsurge as a “doing.” But as we 
have seen, to do supposes the nihilation of a given. One does 
something with or to something. Thus freedom is a lack of 
being in relation to a given being; it is not the upsurge of a 
full being. And if it is this hole in being, this nothingness of 
being as we have just said, it supposes all being in order to 
rise up in the heart of being as a hole. Therefore it could not 
determine its existence from the standpoint of nothingness, 
for all production from the standpoint of nothingness can 
be only being-in-itself. 

We have proved elsewhere in Part One of this work that 
nothingness can appear nowhere except at the heart of 
being. Here we add also the demands of common sense: 
empirically we can be free only in relation to a state of things 
and in spite of this state of things. I will be said to be free in 
relation to this state of things when it does not constrain 
me. Thus the empirical and practical concept of freedom is 
wholly negative; it issues from the consideration of a situation 
and establishes that this situation leaves me free to pursue this 
or that end. One might say even that this situation conditions 
my freedom in this sense, that the situation is there in order 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM ' 625 

not to constrain me. Remove the prohibition to circle m 
the streets after -the curfew, and what meanmg ^an there be 
for me to have the freedom (which, for example, has been 
conferred on me by a pass) to take a walk at night/ 

Thus freedom is a lesser being which supposes ^ 

order to elude it. It is not free not to exist or not to be free. 
We are going to grasp immediately the connection of these 
two structures. In- fact, as freedom is the escape from being, 
it could not produce itself laterally alongside being and in a 
project of “surveying”; one can not escape from a gaol in 
which one is not imprisoned. A projection of the self on the 
margin of being can in no way constitute itself as the nihila- 
tion of this being. Freedom is the escape from an engage- 
ment in being; it is the nihilation of a being which it is. This 
does not mean that human-reality exists first, to be free sub- 
sequently. “Subsequently” and “first” are terms created by 
freedom itself. The upsurge of freedom is effected by 
the double nihilation of the being which it is and of 
the being in the midst of which it is. Naturally free- 
dom is not this being in the sense of being-in-itself. But by 
freedom’s illuminating insufficiencies in the light of the end 
chosen, there is this being which is its own. Freedom has to be 
behind itself this being which it has hot chosen; and precisely 
to the extent that it turns back upon it in order to illuminate 
it, freedom causes this being which is its own to appear in 
relation with the plenum of being — that is, to exist in the 
midst of the world. We said that freedom is not free not to be 
free and that it is not free not to exist. This is because the 
fact of not being able not to be free is the facticity of free- 
dom, and the fact of not being able not to exist is its contin- 
gency. Contingency and facticity are really one; there is a 
bemg which freedom has to be in the form of non-being 
(that is, of nihilation). To exist as the fact of freedom or to 
have to be a being in the midst of the world are one and the 

same thing, and this means that freedom is originally a rela- 
tion^ to the given. 

But what is this relation to the given? Are we to 

fretdoSM ’f ’ in-itsel£) conditions 

freedom Tbe given does not cause 

thrm, 1 , V reason” comes into the world 

freedom “ i' necessary condition of 

freedom smce we are on the level of pure contingency. 



626 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

Neither is it an indispensable matter on which freedom must 
exercise itself, for this would be to suppose that freedom exists 
ready-made as an Aristotelian form or as a Stoic Pneuma and 
that it looks for a matter to work in. The given in no way 
enters into the constitution of freedom since freedom is interi- 
orized as the internal negation of the given. It is simply the 
pure contingency which freedom exerts by denying the given 
while making itself a choice; the given is the plenitude of 
being which freedom colors with insufBciency and with neg- 
atite by illuminating it with the light of an end which does not 
exist. The given is freedom itself in so far as freedom exists; 
and whatever it does, freedom can not escape its existence. 
The reader will have understood that this given is nothing 
other than the in-itself nihilated by the for-itself which has 
to be it, that the body as a point of view on the world, that 
the past as the essence which the for-itself was — that these 
are three designations for a single reality. By its nihUating 
withdrawal, freedom causes a whole system of relations to be 
established, from the point of view of the end, between all 
in-itselfs; that is, between the plenum of being which is re- 
vealed then as the world and the being which it has to be in 
the midst of this plenum and which is revealed as one being, 
as one “this” which it has to be. 

Thus by its very projection toward an end, freedom con- 
stitutes as a being in the midst of the world a particular 
datum which it has to be. . Freedom does not choose it, for 
this would be to choose its own existence; but by the choice 
which it makes of its end, freedom causes ‘ the datum 
to be revealed in this or that way, in this or that light in 
connection with the revelation of the world itself. Thus 
the very contingency of freedom and the world which sur- 
rounds this contingency with its own contingency will appear 
to freedom only in the light of the end which it has 
chosen; that is, not as brute existents but in the unity of the 
illumination of a single nihilation. And freedom would 
never be able to reapprehend this ensemble as a pure datum, 
for m that case it would be necessary that this freedom be 
outside of all choice and therefore that it should cease 
to be freedom. We shall use the term situation for the 
contingency of freedom in the plenum of being of the 
world inasmuch as this datum, which is there only in order 
not to conrfram freedom, is revealed to this freedom only 
as already illuminated by the end which' freedom chooses. 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


627 


Thus the datum never appears to the for-itself as a brute 
existent, in-itself; it is discovered always as a cause since 
it is revealed only in the light of an end which illuminates 
it. Situation and motivation are really one. The for-itself dis- 
covers itself as engaged in being, hemmed in by being, 
threatened by being; it discovers the state of things which 
surrounds it as the cause for a reaction of defense or attack. 
But it can make this discovery only because it freely posits 
the end in relation to which the state of things is threatening 
or favorable. 

These observations should show us that the situation, 
the common product of the contingency of the in-itself and 
of freedom, is an ambiguous phenomenon in which it is 
impossible for the for-itself to distinguish the contribution 
of freedom fromuhat of the brute existent. In fact, just as 
freedom is the esrape from a contingency which it has to be 
in order to escape it, .so the situation is the free coordination 
and the free qualification of a brute given which does not 
allow itself to be qualified in any way at all. Here I am at 
the foot of this crag which appears to me as “not scalable.” 
This means that the rock appears to me in the light of a 
projected scaling — a secondary project which finds its mean- 
ing in terms of an initial project which is my being-in-the- 
world. Thus the rock is carved out on the ground of the 
world by the effect of the initial choice of my freedom. But 
on the other hand, what my freedom can not determine is 
whether the rock “to be scaled” will or will not lend itself 
to scaling. This is part of the brute being of the rock. Never- 
theless the rock can show its resistance to the scaling only 
if the rock is integrated by freedom in a “situation” of 
which the general theme is scaling. For the simple traveler 
who passes over this road and whose free project is a pure 
aesthetic ordering of the landscape, the crag is not revealed 
.either as scalable or as not-scalable; it is manifested only 
as beautiful or ugly. 

Thus it is impossible to determine in each particular case 
what comes from freedom and what comes from the brute be- 
ing of the for-itself. The given in-itself as resistance or as aid 
is revealed only in the light of the projecting freedom. But 
the projecting freedom organizes an illumination such that 
the in-itself is revealed by it as it is (i.e., resisting or favor- 
able); but we must clearly understand that the resistance 
of the given is not directly admissible as an in-itself quai- 



628 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ity of the given but only as an indication — across a free 
illumination and a free refraction — of an inapprehensible 
quid. Therefore it is only in and through the free upsurge of 
a freedom that the world develops and reveals the resistance 
which can render the projected end unrealizable. Man 
encounters an obstacle only within the field of his freedom. 
Better yet, it is impossible to decree a priori what comes 
from the brute existent and what from freedom in the char- 
acter of this or that particular existent functioning as an 
obstacle. What is an obstacle for me may not be so for 
another. There is no obstacle in an absolute sense, but the 
obstacle reveals its coefficient of adversity across freely invent- 
ed and freely acquired techniques. The obstacle reveals this 
efficient also in terms of the value of the e^nd posited by free- 
dom. The rock will not be an obstacle if I, wish at any cost to 
arrive at the top of the mountain, ^n the other hand, 
it will discourage me if I have freely/, fixed limits to my desire 
of making the projected climb. TTaus the world by coeffi- 
cients of adversity reveals to me the way in which I stand in 
relation to the ends which I assign myself, so that I can 
never know if it is giving me information about myself 
or about it. Furthermore the coefficient of adversity of the 
given is never a simple relation to my freedom as a pure nihi- 
lating thrust. It is a relation, illuminated by freedom, between 
the datum which is the cliff and the datum which my 
freedom has to be; that is, between the contingent which 
it is not and its pure facticity. If the desire to scale it is 
equal, the rock will be easy for one athletic climber but 
difficult for another, a novice, who is not well trained 
and who has a weak body. But the body in turn is revealed ^ 
as well or poorly trained only in relation to a free choice. It 
is because I am there and because I have made of myself 
what I am that the rock develops in relation to my body 
a coefficient of adversity. For the lawyer who has remained 
in the city and who is pleading a case, whose body is hidden 
under his lawyer’s robe, the rock is neither hard nor easy 
to climb; it is dissolved in the totality “world” without in 
any way emerging from it. And in one sense it is I who 
choose my body as weak by making it face the difficulties 
wnich I cause to be born (mountain climbing, cycling, sport). 

If I have not chosen to take part in sports, if I live in the 
city, and if I concern myself exclusively with business or 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 629 

intellectual work, then from this point of view my body will 
have no quality whatsoever. 

Thus we begin to catch a glimpse of the paradox of free- 
dom: there is freedom only in a situation, and there is a 
situation only through freedom. Human-reality everywhere 
encounters resistance and obstacles which it has not created, 
but these resistances and obstacles have meaning only 
in and through the free choice which human-reality is. 
But in order better to grasp the meaning of these remarks and 
to derive the advantages which they allow, it wUl be well 
at present to analyze in the light of them certain specific 
examples. What we have called the facticity of freedom is 
the given which it has to be and which it illuminates by its 
project. This given is manifested in several ways although 
within the absolute unity of a single illumination. It is 
my place, my body, my past, my position in so far as 
it is already determined by the indications of Others, finally 
my fundamental relation to the Other. We are going to 
examine successively as with specific examples these various 
structures of the situation. But we must never lose sight of 
the fact that no one of them is given alone and that when we 
consider one of them in isolation, we are restricted to making 
it appear on the synthetic ground of the others. 

A. My Place 

My place is defined by the spatial order and by the particular 
nature of the “thises” which are revealed to me on the 
ground of the world. It is naturally the spot in which I 
“live” (my “country” with its sun, its climate, its resources, 
its hydrographic and orographic configuration). It is also 
more simply the arrangement and the order of the objects 
which at present appear to me (a table, beyond the table a 
window, to the left of the window a cabinet, to the right 
a chair, and beyond the window the street and the sea), 
which indicate me as the reason for their order. It is not 
possible for me not to have a place; otherwise my relation 
to the world would be a state of survey, and the world would 
no longer be manifested to me in any way at all — as we have 
seen earlier. Moreover, although this actual place can have 
been assigned to me by my freedom (I have “come” here), 

I have been able to occupy it only in connection with that 
which I occupied previously and by following paths marked 



630 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

out by the objects themselves. This previous place refers 
me to another, this to another, and so on to the pure contin- 
gency of my place; that is, to that place of mine which no 
longer refers to anything else which is a part of my experi- 
ence: the place which is assigned to me by my birth. 

It would be useless to explain this last place by the one 
which my mother occupied when she brought me into the 
- world. The chain is broken, the places freely chosen by my 
parents would be invalid as an explanation of my places. 
If one considers any one of them in its connection with my 
original place — as when one says, for example, “I was born 
at Bordeaux because my father was given a position there as 
a civU servant,” or “I was bom at Tours because ray grand- 
parents had property there and my mother took refuge near 
them when during her pregnancy she learned of my father’s 
death” — ^this merely shows more clearly how for me birth 
and the place which it assigns me are contingent things. 
Thus to be bora is, among other characteristics, to take one's 
place, or rather according to what we have just said, to 
receive it. And as this original place will be that in terms 
of which I shall occupy new places according to deter- 
mined rules, it seems that we have here a strong restriction 
of my freedom. Moreover as soon as one reflects on it, the 
question is seen to be exceedingly complicated. The parti- 
sans of free-will point out that along with any place present- 
ly occupied, an infinity of other places is offered to my choice. 
The opponents of freedom insist on the fact that an 
infinity of places is denied me by the fact that objects turn 
toward me a face which I have not chosen and which is 
exclusive of all others; they add that my place is too pro- 
foundly bound up with other conditions of my existence 
(my dietary habits, climate, etc.) not to contribute to making 
me. Between the partisans and opponents of freedom a 
decision seems impossible. This is because the debate has 
not been placed on its true level. 

If we wish to posit the question as it should be, we must 
proceed from this antinomy: human-reality originally receives 
its place in the midst of things; human-reality is that by 
which something we can call place comes to things. Without 
human-reality there would have been neither space nor 
place, and yet this human-reality by which placing comes 
to things comes to receive its- place among things without 
having any say in the matter. In truth there is no mystery 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 631 

here, but the description must proceed from the antinomy; 
for it is this which will give to us the exact relation between 
freedom and facticity. 

We have seen that geometrical space — i.e., the pure reci- 
procity of spatial relations — ^is a pure nothingness. The only 
concrete placing which can be revealed to me is absolute 
extension — i.e., thatrWhich is defined by my place considered 
as the center for which distances are accounted for absolute- 
ly, with me as object and without reciprocity. The only 
absolute extension is that which unfolds starting from a 
location which I am absolutely. No other point could be 
chosen as an absolute center of reference without being 
immediately involved in universal relativity. If there is an 
extension within the limits of which I shall apprehend my- 
self as free or as not-free, an extension which will be 
presented to me as helpful or as adverse (separating), -this 
can be only because before all else I exist my place without 
choice, without necessity either, as the pure absolute fact of 
my being-there. I am there, not here but there. This is 
the absolute and incomprehensible fact which is at the 
origin of extension and consequently of my original relations 
with things (with these things rather than with those), A 
fact of pure contingency — an absurd fact. 

Yet on the other hand, this place which I am is a rela- 
tion. A univocal relation, to be sure, but a relation all the 
same. If I am limited to existing my place, I can not at the 
same time be elsewhere in order to establish this fundamental 
relation; I can not have even a dim comprehension of the 
object in relation to which my place is defined. I can only 
exist the inward determinations which the inapprehensible 
and unthinkable objects which surround me without my 
knowing it can provoke in me. By the same token the very 
reality of absolute extension disappears, and I am separated 
from everything which resembles a place. Furthermore I am 
neither free nor not-free; I am a pure existent without 
constraint, but without any way either of denying the con- 
straint. In order that such a thing as an extension originally 
defined as my place may come into the world and by the same 
stroke strictly define me, it is not merely necessary that I 
exist my place — i.e., that / have to be there. It is necessary 
as well that I be able to be not wholly here so that I can be 
over there, near the object which I locate at ten feet from 
me and from the standpoint of which I make my place 



632 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


known to myself. The univocal relation which defines my 
place functions in fact as a relation between something 
which I am and something which I am not. This relation 
in order to be revealed must be established. It supposes there- 
fore that I am in a position to effect the following operations: 

(1) I must be able to escape what 1 am and to nihilate it 
in such a way that what I am, although it is existed, can 
still be revealed as the term of a relation. This relation is 
immediately given. It is not, however, given in the simple 
contemplation of objects (if we tried to derive space from 
pure contemplation, one could well object, for objects are 
given with absolute dimensions, not with absolute distances). 
It is given rather in our contemplating our immediate action 
(“He is coming toward us,” “Let’s avoid him,” “I am 
running after him,” etc.). It implies as such a comprehension 
of what I am as being-there. But at the same time it is very 
necessary to define what I am from the standpoint of the 
being-there of other “thises.” I am as being-there the one 
toward whom someone comes running, the one who has 
still an hour to climb before being at the top of the moun- 
tain, etc. Therefore when I look at the mountain top, for 
example, we are dealing with an escape from myself accom- 
panied by a reflux which I effect in terms of the summit of 
the mountain toward my being-there in order to situate 
myself. Thus I must be “what I have to be” by the very fact 
of escaping it. In order for me to be defined by my place, 
it is necessary first that I escape myself in order to proceed 
to posit the co-ordinates in terms of which I shall define 
myself more narrowly as the center of the world. It should 
be noted that my being-there can in no way determine the 
surpassing which is going to fix and to locate things since 
my being-there is a ' pure given, incapable of projecting 
and since, moreover, in order to be defined strictly as this 
or that being-there, it is already necessary that it has been 
determined by the surpassing followed by the reflux. 

(2) I must be able by an internal negation to escape 
the “thises” — in the midst of — the world which I am not 
and by which 1 make known to myself what 1 am. To dis- 
cover them and to escape them is the result, as we have seen, 
of a single negation. Here again the internal negation is 
first and spontaneous in relation to the datum as discov- 
ered. We can not admit that the datum provokes our appre- 
hension; on the contrary, in order that there may be a “this” 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


633 


which announces its distances to the Being-there which I 
am, it is necessary for me to escape it by di pure negation., 
Nihilation, internal negation, a determining turning back 
upon the being-there which I am — these three operations 
are really one. They are only moments of an original tran- 
scendence which launches toward an end by nihilating me so 
that I may make known to myself what I am by means 
of the future. Thus it is my freedom which comes to confer 
on my place and to define it as such by situating me. The 
sole reason that I can be strictly limited to this being-there 
which I am is that my ontologicd structure is not to be what 
I am and to be what I am not. 

Furthermore this determination of placing, which pre- 
supposes all transcendence, can occur only in relation to an 
end. It is in the light of an end that my place takes on its 
meaning. For I could never be simply there. My place is 
grasped as an exile or, on the contrary, as that natural, re- 
assuring and favored location which Mauriac called querencia, 
comparing it to the place to which the wounded bull always 
returns in the arena. In relation to what I project doing, in 
relation to the world in totality and hence to my being-in- 
the-world, my place appears to me as an aid or a hindrance. 

To be in place is to be far from or near to — -^that 

is, place is provided with a meaning in relation to a certain 
not-yet-existing being which one wants to attain. It is 
the accessibility or the inaccessibility of this end which 
defines place. It is therefore in the light of not-being and 
of the future ,that my position can be actually understood. 
“To be there” is to have to take just one step in order to 
reach the teapot, to be able to dip the pen in the mk by 
stretching my arm, to have to turn my back to the window 
if I want to read without tiring my eyes, to have to ride my 
bicycle and to put up with the fatigue of a hot afternoon for 
two hours if I wish to see my friend Pierre, to take the train 
and pass a sleepless night if I want to see Annie. 
For a Colonial, “to be there” is to be twenty days away from 
France; better yet, if he is a civil servant and is waiting for 
a trip at government expense, it is to be six months and 
seven days from Bordeaux or from Etaples. For a soldier, 
“to be there” is to be a hundred and ten, a hundred and 
twenty days from his discharge. The future — a projected 
future — intervenes everywhere; it is my future life at Bor- 
deaux, at Etaples, the future discharge of the soldier, the future 



634 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

word which I shall write with a pen wet with ink — it is all this 
which means my place to me and which makes me exist with 
nervousness or impatience or nostalgia. On the other hand, 
if I am fleeing from a group of men or from public opinion, 
then my place is defined by the time which would be neces- 
sary for these people to discover me at the far end of the 
village where I am lodging, for them to arrive at this village, 
etc. In this case the isolation is what makes my place known 
to me as favorable. Here to be in place is to be sheltered. 

This choice of my end slips into even purely spatial rela- 
tions (high and low, right and left, etc.) so as to give them 
an existential meaning. The mountain is “overwhelming” if I 
live at the foot of it; on the other hand, if I am at its peak, 
the mountain is recovered by the very project of my pride and 
symbolizes the superiority which I attribute to myself over 
other men. The place of rivers, the distance from the sea, 
etc., come into play and are provided with symbolic meaning; 
constituted in the light of my end, my place reminds me 
symbolically of this end in all its details as in its ensemble 
connections. We shall return to this point when we want to 
defime more exactly the object and the method of existential 
psychoanalysis. The brute relation of distance to objects can 
never be allowed to get its meaning and symbols from out- 
side, for these are our very way of constituting it. Even more 
this brute relation itself has meaning only in relation to the 
choice of techniques which allow distances to be measured 
and to be traversed. A particular city situated twenty miles 
from my village and connected with it by a streetcar is much 
nearer to me than a rocky peak situated four miles away but 
-at an altitude of two thousand eight hundred meters. Heideg- 
ger has shown how daily concerns assign to instruments a 
place which has nothing in common with pure geometric dis- 
tance; my glasses, he says, once they are on my nose, are 
much farther from me than the object which I see through 
them. 

Thus it must be said that the facticity of my place is re- 
vealed to me only in and through the free choice which I 
make of my end. Freedom is indispensable to the discovery of 
my facticity. I learn of this facticity from all the points of the 
future which I project; it is from the standpoint of this 
chosen future that facticity appears to me with its character- 
istics of impotence, of contingency, of weakness, of absurdity. 
It is in. relation to my dream of seeing New York that it is 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


635 


absurd and painful for me to live at Mont-de-Marsan. But 
conversely facticity is the only reality which freedom can 
discover, the only one which it can nihilate by the positing of 
an end, the only thing in terms of which it is meaningful to 
posit an end. For if the end can illuminate the situation, this 
is because the end is constituted as a projected modification 
of this situation. My place appears in terms of the changes 
which I project. But to change implies something to be 
changed, which is precisely my place. Thus freedom is the 
apprehension of my facticity. It would be absolutely useless 
to seek to define or to describe the “quid” of this facticity 
“before” freedom turns back upon it in order to apprehend 
it as a determined deficiency. My place, before freedom has 
circumscribed my placing as a lack of a certain kind, “is” 
not, strictly speakmg, anything at all since the very extension 
in terms of which all place is understood does not exist. On 
the other hand, the question itself is unintelligible, for it. 
involves “before” which has no meaning; it is freedom,- in 
fact, which temporalizes itself along the lines of a “before” 
and “after.” Nevertheless the fact remains that this brute and 
unthinkable “quid” is that without which freedom could not 
be freedom. It is the very facticity of my freedom. 

It is only in the act by which freedom has revealed factic- 
ity and apprehended it as place that this place thus defined 
is manifested as an impediment to my desires, an obstacle, etc. 
Otherwise how could it possibly be an obstacle? An obstacle 
to what? A' compulsion to do what? The story i^s told of an 
emigrant who was going to leave France for Argentina after 
the failure of his political party: When someone remarked to 
him that Argentina was “very far away,” he asked, “Far from 
what?” And it is very certain that if Argentina appears “far 
away” to those who live in France, it is so in relation to an 
implicit national project which valorizes their place as French. 
For the internationalist revolutionary, Argentina is a center 
of the world as is any other country. But if we have by a pri- 
mary project first constituted French territory as our absolute 
place, and if some catastrophe forces us to go into exile, it is 
in relation to this initial project that Argentina will appear 
to us as “very far away,” as a “land of exile”; it is in relation 
fo this project that we shall feel ourselves expatriated. 

Thus our freedom itself creates the obstacles from which 
we suffer. It is freedom itself which, by positing its end and by 
choosing this end as inaccessible or accessible with difficulty. 



636 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

causes our placing to appear to our projects_as an insurmount- 
able resistance or a resistance to be surmounted with difficulty. 
It is freedom again which establishes the spatial connections 
between objects as the first type of a relation of instrumental- 
ity, which decides on techniques permitting distances to be 
measured and cleared, and thus constitutes its own restriction. 
But to be precise, freedom can exist only as restricted since 
freedom is choice. Every choice, as we shall see, supposes 
elimination and selection; every choice is a choice of finitude. 
Thus freedom can be truly free only by constituting facticity 
as its own restriction. It would therefore be to no point to 
say that I am not free to go to New York because of the 
fact that I am a minor government official at Mont-de- 
Marsan. On the contrary, it is in relation to my proj- 
ect of going to New York that I am going to situate myself 
at Mont-de-Marsan. My placing in the world, the relation 
of Mont-de-Marsan to New York and to China would be 
altogether different if, for example, my project were to become 
a wealthy farmer at Mont-de-Marsan. In the first case Mont- 
de-Marsan appears on the ground of a world which maintains 
an organized connection with New York, Melbourne, and 
Shanghai; in the second it emerges on the ground of an un- 
differentiated world. As for the real importance of my proj- 
ect of going to New York, I alone decide it. It can be just 
a way of choosing myself as discontented with Mont-de-Mar- 
san; and in this case everything is centered on Mont-de- 
Marsan; I simply make proof of the need of perpetually 
nihilating my place, of living in a perpetual withdrawal in 
relation to the city which I inhabit. It' can also be a project 
in which I wholly engage myself. In the first case I shall 
apprehend my place as an insurmountable obstacle and I shall 
have simply used an indirect means to define it indirectly in 
the world. In the second case, on the other hand, the obstacles 
will no longer exist; my place will be no longer a point of 
attachment but a point of departure, for in order to go to New 
York, some point of departure is necessary. Thus I shall 
apprehend myself at any moment 'whatsoever as engaged in 
the world at my contingent place. But it is precisely this 
engagement which gives meaning to my contingent place and 
which is my freedom. To be sure, in being born 1 take a place, 
but I am responsible for the place which I take. We can see 
clearly here the inextricable connection of freedom and factic- 
ity in the situation. Without facticity freedom would not 



BEING AND DOING; FREEDOM 


637 ' 


exist — ^as a power of nihilation and of choice — and without 
freedom f acticity would not be discovered and would have no 
meaning. 


B. My Past 

We have a past. Of course we have been able to establish that 
this past does not determine our acts as a prior phenomenon 
determines a consequent phenomenon; we have shown that 
the past is without force to constitute the present and to 
sketch out the future. Nevertheless the fact remains that the 
freedom which escapes toward the future can not give itself 
any past it likes according to its fancy; there are even more 
compelling reasons for the fact that it can not produce itself 
without a past. It has to be its own past, and this past is 
irremediable. It even seems at first glance that freedom can 
not modify its past in -any way; the past is that which is out 
of reach and which haunts us at a distance' without our even 
being able to turn back to face it in order to consider it. If 
the past does not determine our actions, at least it is such that 
we can not take a new decision except in terms of it. If I 
have been trained at a naval academy, and if I have become 
an officer in the Navy, at each moment that I assume myself 
and consider myself, I am engaged; at the very instant when I 
apprehend myself, I am on watch on the bridge of the ship of 
which I am second in command. I can suddenly revolt 
against this fact, hand in my resignation, decide on suicide. 
These extreme measures are taken in connection with the past 
which is mine; if they aim at destroying it, this is because 
my past exists, and my most radical decisions can succeed only 
in taking a negative position with respect to my past. But 
basically this is to recognize the past’s immense importance 
as a backdrop and a point of view. Every action designed to 
wrench me away from my past must first be conceived in terms 
of my particular past; that is, the action must before all rec- 
ognize that it is bom out of the particular past which it 
wishes .to destroy. Our acts, says the proverb, follow after us. 

, The p^t is present and melts insensibly into the present; it is 
the suit of clothes which I selected six months ago, the house 
which I have had built, the book which I began last winter, 
my wife, the promises which I have made to her, my children; 
all which I am I have to be in the mode of having-been. 



638 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


Thus the importance of the past can not be exaggerated 
since for me “Wesen ist was gewesen ist,” essence is what has 
been. But we find here the paradox pointed out previously: 
I can not conceive of myself without a past; better yet, I can 
no longer think anything about myself since I think about 
what I am and since I am in the past; but on the other hand I 
am the being through whom the past comes to myself and to 
the world. 

Let us examine this paradox more closely. Since freedom 
is choice, it is change. It is defined by the end which it pro- 
jects; that is, by the future which it has to be. But precisely 
because the future is the not-yet-existing-state of what is, it 
can be conceived only within a narrow connection with 
what is. It is not possible that what is should illuminate what 
is not yet, for what is is a lack and consequently can be 
known as such only in terms of that which it lacks. The end 
illuminates what is. But to go looking for the end to-come in 
order by means of it to make known that-which-is, requires 
being dready beyond what-is in a nihilating withdrawal 
which makes what-is appear clearly in the state of an isolated- 
system. What-is; therefore, takes on its meaning only when it 
is surpassed toward the future. Therefore what-is is the past 
We see how the past as “that which is to be changed” is in- 
dispensable to the choice of the future and how consequently 
no free surpassing can be effected except in terms of a past 
but we can see too how the very nature of the past comes to 
the past from the original choice of a future. In particular the 
irremediable quality of the past comes from my actual choice 
of the future; if the past is that in terms of which I conceive 
and project a new state of things in the future, then the past 
itself is that which is left in place, that which consequently is 
itself outside all perspective of change. Thus in order for the 
future to be realizable, it is necessary that the past be ir- 
remediable. 

It is possible for me not to exist; but if I exist, I can not 
lack having a past. Such is the form which is assumed here by 
the “necessity of my contingency.” But on the other hand, 
as we have seen, two existential characteristics in particular 
qualify the For-itself : 

, (1) Nothing is in consciousness which— is not conscious- 
ness of being. 

(2) In 'my being, my being is in question. This means 
that nothing comes to me which is not chosen. 



-BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


639 


We have seen, indeed, that a Past which was only Past 
would collapse in an honorary existence in which it would 
have lost all connection with the present. In order for us to 
“have” a past, it is necessary that we maintain it in existence 
by our very project toward the future; we do not receive our 
past, but the necessity of our contingency implies that we are 
not able not to choose it. This is what it means “to have to be 
one’s own past.” We see that this necessity, considered here 
from a purely temporal point of view, is not basically distinct 
from the primary structure of freedom, which must be the 
nihilation of the being which it is and which, by this very 
nihilation, brings it about that there is a. being which it is. 

But while freedom is the choice of an end in terms of the 
past, conversely the past is what it is only in relation to the 
end chosen. TTiere is an unchangeable element in the past 
{e.g., I had whooping cough when I was five years old) and 
an element which is eminently variable (the meaning of the 
brute fact in relation to the totality of my being). But since, 
on the other hand, the meaning of the past fact penetrates it 
through and through (I can not “recall” my childhood whoop- 
ing cough outside of a precise project which defines its mean- 
ing), it is finally impossible for me to distinguish the un-' 
changeable brute existence from the variable meanbg which 
it includes. To say “I had whooping cough when I was four 
years old”^^ supposes a thousand projects, in particular the 
adoption of the calendar as a system of reference for my 
individual existence (hence the adoption of an original posi- 
tion with regard to the social order) and a confident belief 
in the accounts which third persons give of my childhood,' a 
belief which certainly goes along with a respect or an affec- 
tion for my parents, a respect which shapes its meaning for 
me, etc. That brute fact itself is, but apart from the witness of 
others, its date, the technical name of the illness (an ensemble 
of meanings which depend on my projects) what can it be? 
Thus this brute existence, although necessarily existent and 
unchangeable, stands as the ideal end — beyond reach — of a 
systematic specification of all the meanings included in a 
memory. There is, of course, a “pure matter” of memory in 
the sense in which Bergson speaks of pure memory; but when 

Tr. Sartre’s uncertainty as to just when he had whooping cough seems 
to imply even more shiftiness on the part of the past than his philosophy 
jusUfiesI 



640 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

it shows itself, it is always in and through a project which 
includes the appearance of this matter in its purity. 

Now the meaning of the past is strictly dependent on my 
present project. This certainly does not mean that I can 
make the meaning of my previous acts vary in any way I 
please; quite the contrary, it means that the fundamental proj- 
ect which I am decides absolutely the meaning which the past 
which I have to be can have for me and for others. I alone in 
fact can decide at each moment the bearing of the past. I do 
not decide it by debating it, by deliberating over it, and in 
each instance evaluating the importance of this or that prior 
event; but by projecting myself toward my ends, I preserve 
the past with me, and by action I decide its meaning. Who 
shall decide whether that mystic crisis in my fifteenth year 
“was” a pure accident of puberty or, on the contrary, the first 
sign of a future conversion? I myself, according to whether 
I shall decide — at twenty years of age, at thirty years — to be 
converted. The project of conversion by a single stroke con- 
fers on an adolescent crisis the value of a premonition which 
I had not taken seriously. Who shall decide whether the 
period which I spent in prison after a theft was fruitful or 
deplorable? I — according to whether I give up stealing or be-- 
come hardened. Who can decide the educational value of a 
trip, the sincerity of a profession of love, the purity of a past 
intention, etc.? It is I, always I, according to the ends 
by which I illuminate these past events. 

Thus all my past is there pressing, urgent, imperious, but 
its meanings and the orders which it gives me I choose by the 
very project of my end. Of course the engagements which I 
have undertaken weigh upon me. Of course the marriage I 
made earlier, the house I bought and furnished last year limit 
my possibilities and dictate my conduct; but precisely because 
my projects are such- 1 reassume the marriage contract. In 
other words, precisely because I do not make of it a “mar- 
riage Contract which is past, surpassed, dead” and because, on 
the contrary, my projects imply fidelity to the engagements 
undertaken or the decision to have an “honorable life” as a 
husband and a father, etc., these projects necessarily come to 
illuminate the past marriage vow and to confer bn it its 
always actual value. Thus the urgency of the past comes from 
the future. 

Suppose that in the manner of Schlumberger’s hero’-^ I 

Schlumberger. Un homme heureux. Paris: Gallimard. 



641 


- - BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 

radically modify my fundamental project, that I seek, for 
example, to tree myself from a continued state of happiness, 
and my earlier engagements will lose all their urgency. They 
will no longer be here except as the towers and ramparts of 
the Middle Ages are here, structures which one can not deny 
but which have no other meaning than that of recalling -a 
stage previously traversed, a civilization and a period of 
political and economic existence which today are surpassed 
and perfectly dead. It is the future which decides whether the 
past is living or dead. The past, in fact, is originally a proj- 
ect, as the actual upsurge of my being. And to the same 
extent that it is a project, it is an anticipation; its meaning 
comes to it from the future which it sketches in outline. 
When the past slips wholly into the past, its absolute value 
depends on the validation or invalidation of the anticipations 
which it was. But it depends on my actual freedom to confirm 
the meaning of these anticipations by again accepting re- 
sponsibility for them — i.e., by anticipating the future which 
they anticipated — or to invalidate them by simply anticipating 
another future. In this case the past falls back as a disarmed 
and duped expectation; it is “without force.” This is because 
the only force of the past comes to it from the future; no 
matter how I live or evaluate my past, I can do so only in the 
light of a project of myself toward the future. , 

Thus the order of my choices of the future is going to 
determine an order of my past, and this order will contain 
nothing of the chronological. There will be first the always 
living past which is always confirmed: my promise of love, 
certain business contracts, a certain picture of myself to 
which I am faithful. Then there is the ambiguous past 
which has ceased to please me and to which I still hold in- 
directly: for example, this suit which I am wearing, and 
which I bought at a certain period when I had the desire to 
be fashionable, displeases me extremely at present; hence the 
past in which I “chose” the suit is truly dead. But on the 
other hand, my actual project of economy is such that I must 
continue to wear this suit rather than get another. Hence it 
belongs to a past which is both dead and living like those 
social institutions - which, having been created for a deter- - 
mined end, have now outlived the regime which established 
them and have been -made to serve altogether different ends, 
sometimes even opposed ends. A living past, a half-dead past, 
survivals, ambiguities, discrepancies: the ensemble of these 



642 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

layers of pastness is organized by the unity of my .project It is 
by means of this project that diere is installed the complex 
system of references which causes any fragment of my past to 
enter into an hierarchical, plurivalent organization in which, 
as in a work of art, each partial structure indicates in differ- 
ent ways, various other partial structures and the total struc- 
ture. 

Furthermore this decision with respect to the value, the 
order, and the nature of our past is simply the historical 
choice m general. If human societies are historical, this does 
not stem simply from the fact that they have a past but from 
the fact that they reassume the past by making it a memorial. 
When American capitalism decides to enter the European 
war of 1914-1918 because it sees there the opportumty 
for profitable transaction, it is not historical; it is only 
utilitarian. But when in the light of its utilitarian projects, 
it recovers the previous relations of the United States with 
France and gives to them the meaning of the paying of a 
debt of honor by Americans to France, then it becomes 
historical. In particular it makes itself historical by the famous 
sentence: “Lafayette, we are here!” It goes without saying &at 
if a different view of her real interests had led the United 
States to place itself on the side of Germany, she would not 
have lacked past elements to recover on the memorial 
level. One can imagine, for example, propaganda based on 
“blood kinship,” which chiefly would have taken into account 
the proportion of Germans in the emigration to America in 
the nineteenth century. It would be in vain to try to view 
these references to .the past as purely publicity enterprises; 
actually the essential fact is that they are necessary in order 
to gain the adherence of the masses and that therefore the 
masses demand a political project which illuminates and 
justifies their past. Moreover, it is evident that the past is 
thus created. There has been in this way the construction 
of a common French-American past which, on the one 
hand, signified the great economic interests of the Americans 
and, on the other hand, the actual aflSnities of two democrat- 
ic capitalisms. Similarly about 1938 we saw how a new 
generation, concerned with the international events which 
were in preparation, now suddenly illuminated the period 
of 1918-1938 with a new light by calling it “the period 
between the wars” even before war actually had btirst forth 
in 1939. Suddenly the period under consideration (1918- 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


643 


1938) was constituted in a form which was limited, surpassed, 
and repudiated whereas those who had lived through it by 
projecting themselves toward a future in continuity with 
their present and their immediate past had experienced 
it as the start of a continuous and unlimited progress. The 
actual project therefore decides whether a defined period 
of the past is in continuity with the present or whether it 
is a discontinuous fragment from which one is emerging and 
which is put at a distance. 

Thus human history would have to be finished before a 
particular event, for example the taking of the Bastille, 
could receive a definitive meaning. Nobody denies, of 
course, that the Bastille was taken in 1789; there is the 
immutable fact. But are we to see in this event a revolt 
without consequence, a popular outburst against a half-dis- 
mantled fortress, an event which the Convention, anxious 
to create a famous past of itself, was able to transform into 
a glorious deed? Or should we consider it as the first mani- 
festation of popular strength by which the populace asserted 
itself, gave itself confidence, and put itself in a position to 
effect the- march on Versailles in those “Last Days of Octo- 
ber”? He who would like to decide the question today 
forgets that the historian is himself historical; that is, that 
he historicizes himself by illuminating “history” in the 
light of his projects and of those of his society. Thus it 
is necessary to say that the meaning of the social past is 
perpetually “in suspense.” 

Now exactly like societies, the human person has a me- 
morial past in suspense. It is this perpetual putting into ques- 
tion of the past which the sages realized very early and which 
the Greek tragedians expressed, for example, by that 
proverb which appears in all their plays: “No man can be 
called happy before his death.” The perpetual historization 
of the For-itself is the perpetual affirmation of its freedom. 

Once this fact is established, it is not necessary to hold that 
&e past’s character as “in suspense” appears to the For-itself 
in the form of a vague or incomplete aspect of its prior his- 
tory.^ On the contrary, quite as much as the choice of the 
For-itself, which in its own way it expresses, the Past is 
apprehended by the For-itself each moment as strictly defined. 
Similarly the Arch of Titus or the Column of Trajan, what- 
ever may be the historical evolution of their meaning else- 
where, appear to the Roman or the tourist who considers 



644 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

them, as realities perfectly mdividualized. In the light of the 
project which illuminates it, the Past is revealed as perfectly 
compelling. The suspended character of the Past is in no way 
miraculous; it only serves to express — on the level of making- 
past and of the in-itself — ^the projective and expectant aspect 
which human reality had before turning to the past. It is 
because this human-reality was a free project eaten away by 
an unpredictable freedom that it becomes “in the past” a 
tributary of the further projects of the For-itself. Human-real- 
ity is condemned to make-itself-past and hence to wait forever 
for the confirmation which it expected from the future. Thus 
the past is indefinitely in suspense because human-reality 
“was” and “will be” perpetually expecting. Expectation and 
suspense only succeed in affirming still more plainly that 
freedom is their original constituent. To say that the past 
of the For-itself is in suspense, to say that its present is an 
expecting, to say that its future is a free project, or that 
it can be nothing without having to be it, or that it is a 
totality-detotalized — all these are one and the same thing. 
But this does not imply any indetermination in my past as it is 
revealed to me at present; it means simply that the right of 
my actual revelation of my past to be definitive is put into 
question. But just as my present is an expectation of a con- 
firmation or of an invalidation which nothing allows it to fore- 
see, so the past, which is involved in this expectation, is precise 
to the same extent that the expectation is precise. But the 
meaning of the past, although strictly individualized, is totally 
dependent on this expectation which itself depends on an 
absolute nothingness; that is, on a free project which does 
not yet exist My past therefore is a concrete and precise 
proposition which as such awaits ratification. This is cer- 
tainly one of the meanings which Kafka’s The Trial tries 
to bring to light, the characteristic in human reality of being 
perpetually in court. To be free is to have one’s freedom 
perpetually on trial. The result is that the past while con- 
fined within my actual free choice is — once this choice has 
determined it — ^an integral and necessary condition of my 
project 

example may make this point clearer. The past of a 
retired soldier under the Restoration is to have been a hero 
of the retreat from Russia. And what we have explained 
just now enables us to understand that this past itself is a 
free choice of the future. It is by choosing not to join 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM - 


645 


in with the government of Louis XVin and the new customs, 
by choosing until the end to hope for the triumphal return 
of the Emperor, by choosing even to conspire to hasten this 
return and to prefer to be a retired soldier rather than an 
active soldier that the old soldier of Napoleon chooses for 
himself a past as a hero of Berezina. Another soldier who 
had formed the project of going over to the new govern- 
ment would certainly not have chosen the same past. But 
conversely, if we are considering only one retired soldier, 
if he lives in almost indecent poverty, if he is embittered, 
and if he longs for the Emperor’s return, this is because he 
was a hero of the retreat from Russia. We must be sure to 
understand this: the past does not act before any constituting 
recovery, and it does not in any way act deterministically; 
but once the past “soldier of the Empire” has been chosen, 
then the conduct of the for-itseif realizes this past. There is 
even no difference between the soldier’s choosing this past 
and his realizing it by his behavior. Thus the for-itself, by 
endeavoring to make of its past glory an intersubjective 
reality, constitutes it in the eyes of others as being an 
objectivity-for-others (the reactions of the officials, for 
example, to the danger represented by these old soldiers). 
Treated as such by others, the soldier acts henceforth in such 
a way as to render himself worthy of a past which he has 
chosen in order to compensate for his present misery and 
failure. He shows himself intransigent, he loses every chance 
of a pension; this is because he “can not” be unworthy of 
his past. 

Thus we choose our past in the light of a certain end, but 
from then on it imposes itself upon us and devours us. This 
is not because this past has an existence by itself different 
from that which we have to be but simply because: (1) it 
is the actually revealed materialization of the end which we 
are; (2) it appears in the midst of the world for us and for 
others, is never alone but sinks into the universal past 
and thereby offers itself to the evaluation of others. Just as 
the geometrician is free to create a particular figure which 
pleases him but can not conceive of one which does not 
immediately enter an infinity of relations with the infinity 
of other possible figures, so our free choice of ourselves 
by causing the upsurge of a certain evaluative order of 
our past, causes the appearance in the world of an infinity 
of relations of this past to the word and to the Other. And 



646 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

this infinity of relations is presented to us as an infinity of 
conducts to be adopted since it is in the future that we 
evaluate our past. We are compelled to adopt these conducts 
in so far as our past appears within the compass of our 
essential project. To will this project, in fact, is to will the 
past; and to will this past is to will to realize it by a thou- 
sand secondary behaviors. Logically the requirements of the 
past are hypothetical imperatives: “If you wish to have such 
and such a past, act in such and such a way.” But as the 
first term is a concrete and categorical choice, the imperative 
also is transformed into a categorical imperative. 

But since the force of compulsion in my past is borrowed 
from my free, reflecting choice and from the very power 
which this choice has given itself, it is impossible to deter- 
mine a priori the compelling power of a past. It is not only 
its content and the order of this content which my free 
choice decides; it is also the adherence of my past to my 
actuality. If within a fundamental perspective which we 
do not yet have to determine, one of my principal projects 
is to progress — i.e., to be always at any cost a little further 
advanced along a certain path than I was yesterday or an 
hour earlier, this progressive project involves in relation to 
my past a series of “uprootings.” The past — which now from 
the height of my progress I regard with a slightly scornful 
pity — is that which is strictly a passive object for moral 
evaluation and judgment. “How stupid 1 was then!” or 
“How wicked I was!” It exists only because I can dissociate 
myself from it. I no longer enter into it, nor do I any 
longer wish to enter into it. This is not, of course, because 
it ceases to exist, but it exists only as that self which I no 
longer am — i.e., that being which I have to be as the self 
which I am no longer. Its function is to be what I have 
chosen of myself in order to oppose myself to it, that which 
enables me to measure myself. Such a for-itself chooses itself 
therefore without solidarity with itself, which means not 
that it abolishes its past but that it posits its past so as not 
to be associated with it, exactly so as to aflflrm its total free- 
dom (that which is past is a certain kind of engagement with 
respect to the past and a certain kind of tradition). On the 
other hand, there are other for-itselfs whose project implies 
the rejection of time and a narrow solidarity with the past. 
In their desire to find a solid ground these latter have, by 
contrast, chosen the past as that which they are, everything 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


647 


else being only an indefinite and unworthy flight from tradi- 
tion. They have chosen at the start the refusal of flight; 
that is, the refusal to refuse. The past consequently has 
the function of requiring of them a fidelity. Thus we shall 
see that the former persons admit scornfully and easily to a 
mistake which they have made whereas the very admission 
will be impossible for the others without their deliberately 
changing their fundamental project; the latter will then em- 
ploy all the bad faith in the world and all the subterfuges which 
they can invent in -order to avoid breaking that faith in 
“what is” which constitutes an essential structure of their 
project. 

Thus like place, the past is integrated with the situation 
when the for-itself by its choice of the future confers on its 
past facticity a value, an hierarchical order, and an urgency in 
terms of which this facticity motivates the act and conduct 
of the for-itself. 


C. My Environment 


My “environment” must not be confused with the place 
which I occupy and which we have already discussed. My 
'environment is made up of the instrumental-things which 
surround me, including their peculiar coefficients of adver- 
sity and utility. Of course in occupying my place, I prepare 
the ground for the revelation of my environment, and by 
changing place — an operation, which, as we have seen, I freely 
realize — provide the basis for the appearance of a new 
environment. But on the other hand the environment can 
change or be changed by others without my having any hand 
in the change. To be sure, Bergson has shown in Matter and 
Memory that a single modification of my place involves the 
total change of my environment while it would be necessary 
to imagine a total and simultaneous modification of all my 
environment in order to be able to speak of a modification 
of my place. Now this global change of the environment is 
inconceivable, but the fact remains that my field of action is 
perpetually traversed by the appearances and disappearances 
of objects with which I have nothing to do. In a general 
way the coefficient of adversity and utility of complexes does 
not depend solely on my place, but on the particular 
potentiality of the instruments. Thus as soon as I exist I 



648 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

am thrown into the midst of existences different from me 
which develop their potentialities around me, for and against 
me. For example, I wish to arrive on my bicycle as quickly 
as possible at the next town. This project involves my personal 
ends, the appreciation of my place and of the distance from 
my place to the town, and the free adaptation of means 
(efforts) to the end pursued. But I have a flat tire, the sun 
is too hot, the wind is blowing against me, etc., all phenom- 
ena which I had not foreseen: these are the environment. 
Of course they manifest themselves in and through my prin- 
cipal project; it is through the project that the wind can 
appear as a headwind or as a “good” wind, through the 
project that the sun is revealed as a propitious or an incon- 
venient warmth. The synthetic organization of these per- 
petual “accidents” constitutes the unity of what the Germans 
call my Umwelt, and this Umwelt can be revealed only 
within the limits of a free project — i.e., of the choice of 
the ends which I am. 

If our description stopped here, however, it would be 
much too simple. If it is true that each object in my surround- 
ings is made known in a situation already revealed and that 
the sum of these objects can not by itself alone constitute a 
situation, if it is true that each instrument is raised on the 
ground of a situation in the world, still the fact remains that 
the abrupt transformation or the abrupt appearance of another 
instrument can contribute to a radical change in the situation. 
Let my the be punctured, and my distance from the next 
town suddenly changes; now it is a distance to be counted by 
steps and not by the revolutions of the wheels. From this 
fact I can acquire the certainty that the person whom I wish 
to see will have already taken the train when I arrive at his 
house, and this certainty can involve other decisions on my 
part (a return to my point of departure, the sending of a 
telegram, etc.). It is even possible, for example, that sure of 
not being able to conclude a projected deal with this person, 
I may return to someone else and sign another contract. Per- 
haps I shall even give up the whole attempt. And shall I count 
my project as a total failure? In this case I shall say that I 
was not able to inform Pierre in time, to come to an under- 
standing with him, etc. Is not this explicit recognition of my 
powerlessness the clearest admission of the limits of my free- 
dom? Of course my freedom to choose, as we have seen, must 
not be confused with my freedom to obtain. But is it not my 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 649 

very choice which is here brought iato play since the adversity 
of the environment is in many cases precisely the occasion 
for the changing of my project? 

Before attacking the fundamental question at issue here, 
it will be well for us to make the question . precise and to 
delimit it. If the changes which occur in my environment 
can involve modifications of my projects, they must be sub- 
ject to two reservations. First, they can not by themselves 
effect the abandoning of my principal project which, on the 
contrary, serves to measure their importance. In fact, if they 
are grasped as the causes of my abandoning this or that 
project, it can be only in the light of a more fundamental proj- 
ect, otherwise they could not be causes since the cause is 
apprehended by the motivating-consciousness which is itself 
a free choice of an end. If the clouds which cover the sky can 
move me to give up my project of an outing, this is because 
they are grasped in a free projection in which the value of 
the outing is bound to a certain state of the sky, which step 
by step refers back to the value of an outing in general, to my 
relation to nature, and to the place which this relation 
occupies in the ensemble of relations which I sustain with the 
world. Secondly, under no circumstances can the object 
which has. appeared or disappeared induce even a partial- re-- 
nunciation of a project. This object must of necessity be 
apprehended as a lack in the original situation; it is necessary 
therefore that the given of its appearance or of its disappear- 
ance be nihilated, that I effect a withdrawal “in relation to it,” 
and consequently that I myself determine myself in' its pres- 
ence. We have already shown that even the red-hot pincers 
of the torturer do not exempt us from being free. This does 
not mean that it is always possible to get around the difficulty, 
to repair the damage, but simply that the very impossibility 
of continuing in a certain direction must be freely constituted. ' 
This impossibility comes to things by means of our free re- 
nunciation; our renunciation is not induced by the impossi- 
bility of maintaining the behavior. 

Once this fact has been established, we must recognize 
that the presence of the given here again, far from being an 
obstacle to our freedom, is demanded by the very existence of 
freedom. This freedom is a certain fre^om which 1 am. But 
what am I if not a certain internal negation of the in-itself? 
Without this in-itself which I deny, I should vanish into 



6S0 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


nothingness. In our Introduction we pointed out that con- 
sciousness can serve as the “ontological proof” of the exis- 
tence of an in-itself. In fact, if there is consciousness of some- 
thing, then it is necessary at the start that this “something” 
have a real being — that is, a being not relative to conscious- 
ness. But we see at present that this proof has a larger bear- 
ing: if I am to be able to do something — anything — it is neces- 
sary that I exercise my action upon beings whose existence is 
in general independent of my existence and in particular 
independent of my action. My action can reveal this other exis- 
tence to me but does not condition it. To be free is to-be-free- 
to-change. Freedom implies therefore the existence of an en- 
vironment to be changed: obstacles to be cleared, tools to be 
used. Of course it is freedom which reveals them as obstacles, 
but by its free choice it can only interpret the meaning of 
their being. It is necessary that they be simply there, wholly 
brute, in order that there may be freedom. To be free is to- 
be-free-to-do, and it is to-be-free-in-the-world. But if this is the 
case, then freedom, by recognizing itself as the freedom to 
change, recognizes and implicitly foresees in its original project 
the independent existence of the given on which it is exercised. 
The internal negation reveals the in-itself as independent, and 
it is this independence which constitutes in the in-itself its 
character as a thing. But consequently what freedom posits by 
the simple upsurge of its being is the fact that it is as 
having to do with something other than itself. To do is pre- 
cisely to change what has no need of something other than 
itself in order to exist; it is to act on that which on principle 
is indifferent to the action, that which can pursue its exis- 
tence or is becoming without the action. Without this indiffer- 
ence of exteriority on the part of the in-itself, the very notion 
of doing would lose its meaning (as we have shown earlier in 
connection with wish and decision), and consequently free- 
dom itself would collapse. Thus the very project of a freedom 
in general is a choice which implies the anticipation and ac- 
ceptance of some kind of resistance somewhere. Not only does 
freedom constitute the compass within which in-itselfs other- 
wise indifferent will be revealed as resistances, but freedom’s 
very project is in general to Jo in a resisting world by means 
of a victory over the world’s resistances. 

Every free project in projecting itself anticipates a margin 
of unpredictability due to the independence of things pre- 
cisely because this independence is that in terms of which a 



BEING AND DOING; FREEDOM 651 

freedom is constituted. As soon as I project going. to the near- 
by village to find Pierre, the punctures, the “headwind,” a 
thousand foreseeable and unforeseeable accidents are given in 
my very project and constitute its meaning. Thus the unex- 
pected puncture which upsets my projects comes to take its 
place in a world pre-outlmed by my choice, for I have never 
ceased, if I may say so, to expect it as unexpected. And even 
if my path has been interrupted by something which I should 
never have dreamed of — ^like a flood or a landslide — in a 
certain sense this unpredictability was foreseen. Just as the 
Romans reserved in their temple a place for unknown gods, 
so in my project a certain margin of indetermination was 
created “for the unpredictable,” and this was done not because 
of experience with “hard blows” or an empirical, prudence 
but by the very nature of my project. Thus in a certain way, 
we can say that human reality is surprised by nothing. 

These observations allow us to bring to light a new charac- 
teristic of a free choice: every project of freedom is an open 
project and not a closed project. Although entirely individual- 
ized, it contains within it the possibility of its further modi- 
fications. Every project implies in its structure the comprehen- 
sion of the Selbstdndigkeit of the things in the world. This 
perpetual foreseeing of the unforeseeable as the margin of in- 
determination of the project which I am enables us to under- 
stand how it is that an accident or a catastrophe,. instead of 
surprising me by its unknown or its extraordinary quality, al- 
ways overwhelms me by a certain quality which it has of 
“bemg already seen — already foreseen,” by its very obvious- 
ness and a kind of fatalistic necessity, which we express by 
saying, “This was bound to happen.” There is nothing which 
astonishes in the world, nothing which surprises us without 
our determining ourselves to be surprised. The original theme 
of astonishment is not that this or that particular thing exists 
within the limits of the world but rather that there is a general 
world; that is, that I am thrown among a totality of exis- 
tents thoroughly indifferent to me. This is because in choosing 
an end, I choose to have relations with these existents and 
because these existents have relations among themselves. I 
choose that they should enter into combination to make 
known to me what I am. Thus the adversity of which things 
bear witness to me is pre-outlined by my freedom as one of 
its conditions, and it is on a freely projected meaning of adver- 



652 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

sity in general that this or that complex can manifest its in- 
dividual coefficient of adversity. 

Each time that there is a question of the situation it is 
necessary to insist on the fact that the state of things de- 
scribed has a reverse side. Here also if freedom pre-outlines 
adversity in general, then this is one way of sanctioning the 
exteriority and indifference of the in-itself. Of course adver- 
sity comes to things through freedom, but this is in so far as 
freedom illuminates its facticity as “being-in-the-midst-of-an- 
in-itself-of-indifference.” Freedom gives itself things as ad- 
verse {i.e., it confers on them a meaning which makes them 
things), but it is by assuming the very given which will be 
meaningful; that is, freedom assumes its exile in the midst of 
an indifferent in-itself in order to surpass this exile. Con- 
versely, furthermore, the contingent given wJiich is assumed 
can support even this primary meaning which is the support 
of all others, this “exile in the midst of indifference” only in 
and through a free assumption of the for-itself. 

Such, in fact, is the primitive structure of the situation; it 
appears here in all its clarity. It is by its very surpassing of the 
given toward its ends that freedom causes the given to exist 
as this given here (previously there was neither this nor that 
nor here) and the given thus designated is not formed 
in any way whatsoever; it is a brute existent,- assumed in 
order to be surpassed. But at the same time that freedom is a 
surpassing of this given, it chooses itself as this surpassing of 
the given. Freedom is not just any kind of surpassing of any 
kind of given. By assuming the brute, given and by confer- 
ring meaning on it, freedom has suddenly chosen itself; its end 
is exactly to change this given, just as the given appears as this 
given in the light of the end chosen. Thus the upsurge of 
freedom is the crystallization of an end across a given and 
the revelation of a given in the light of an end; these 
two structures are simultaneous and inseparable. We shall see 
later in fact that the universal values of the chosen ends are 
disengaged only by analysis; every choice is the choice of a 
concrete change to be bestowed on a concrete given. Every 
situation is concrete. 

Thus the adversity of things and their potentialities in 
general are Uluminated by the end chosen. But there is an 
end only for a for-itself which assumes itself as abandoned in 
the midst of indifference. By this assumption it brings noth- 



BEING AND DOING; FREEDOM 653 

ing new into this contingent, brute abandonment except for a 
meaning. It is responsible for the fact that henceforth there 
is an abandonment, that this abandonment is revealed as a 
situation. . . , 

' We have seen in Part Two that the for-itself by its up- 
surge causes the in-itself to come into the world; still more 
generally, it is by means of nothingness that “there is” the 
in-itself — that is, things. We have seen also that the reality- 
in-itself is there at hand, with its qualities, without any dis- 
tortion or adjunction. We are simply separated from it by 
the various types of nihilation which we instate by our very 
upsurge: world, space and time, potentialities. We have seen 
in particular that although we are surrounded by presences 
(this glass, this inkwell, this table, etc.), these presences are 
inapprehensible as such, for they release whatever it may be of 
them only after a gesture or an act projected by us — ^that is, in 
the future. At present we are able to understand the meaning of 
this state of things: We are separated from things by nothing 
except by our freedom; it is our freedom which is responsible 
for the fact that there are things with all their indifference, 
their impredictability, and their adversity, and for the fact 
that we are inevitably separated from them; for it is on the 
ground of nihilation that they appear and that they are re- 
vealed as bound one to another. Thus the project of my free- 
dom adds nothing to things: it causes there to be things; that 
is, precisely, realities provided with a coefficient of adversity 
and utilizable instrumentality. Freedom makes these thmgs 
reveal themselves in experience — that is, raise themselves 
successively on the ground of the world in the course of a 
process of temporalization. Finally our freedom causes these 
things to manifest themselves as out of reach, independent 
separated from me by the very nothingness which I secrete 
and which I am. It is because freedom is condemned to be 
i^^^~i.e., can not choose itself as freedom — ^that there are 
things; that is, a plenitude of contingency at the heart of 
which it is itself contingency. It is by the assumption of this 
con^gency and by its surpassing that there can be at once a 
c/zozce*and an organization of things in situation; and it is the 
contingency of freedom and the contingency of the in-itself 
which are expressed in situation by the unpredictability 
^d the adversity of the environment. Thus I am absolutely 
tree and absolutely responsible for my situation. But I am 
never free except in situation. 



654 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


D. My Fellowman 

To live in a world haunted by my fellowman is not only to be 
able to encounter the Other at every turn of the road; it is 
also to find myself engaged in a world in which instrumental- 
complexes can have a meaning which my free project has not 
first given to them. It means also that in the midst of this 
world already provided with meaning I meet with a mean- 
ing which is mine and which I have not given to myself, which 
I discover that I “possess already.” Thus when we ask what 
the original and contingent fact of existing in a world in 
which “there are” also Others can mean for our situation, the 
problem thus formulated demands that we study successively 
three layers of reality which come into play so as to constitute 
my concrete situation: instruments which are already meaning- 
ful (a station, a railroad sign, a work of art, a mobilization 
notice), the meaning which I discover as already mine (my 
nationality, my race, my physical appearance) , and finally the 
Other as a center of reference to which these meanings refer. 

Everything would be very simple if I belonged to a world 
whose meanings were revealed simply in the light of my own 
ends. In this case I would dispose of things as instruments or as 
instrumental complexes within the limits of my own choice of 
myself; it is this choice which would make of the mountain an 
obstacle difficult to overcome or a spot from which to get a- 
good view of the landscape, etc,; the problem would not be 
posed of knowing what meaning this mountain could have in 
itself since I would be the one by whom meanings come to 
reality in itself. The problem would again be very much sim- 
plified if I were a monad without doors or windows and if I 
merely knew in some way or other that other monads existed 
or were possible, each of them conferring new meanings on 
the things which I see. In this case, which is the one to which 
philosophers have too often limited themselves in their in- 
quiry, it would be sufficient for me to hold other meanings as 
possible, and finally the plurality of meanings corresponding 
to the plurality of consciousnesses would- coincide very 
simply for me with the possibility always open to me of 
making another choice of myself. But we have seen that this 
monadic conception conceals a hidden solipsism precisely be- 
cause it is going to confuse the plurality of meanings which I 
can attach to the real and the plurality of meaningful sys- 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 655 

terns each one of which refers to a consciousness which I am 
not. Moreover on the level of concrete experience this monad- 
ic description is revealed as inadequate. There exists, in f act, 
something in “my” world other than plurality of possible 
meanings; there exist objective meanings which are given to 
me as not having been brought to light by me. I, by whom 
meanings come to things, I find myself engaged in an already 
meaningful world which reflects to me meanings which I 
have not put into it. - 

One may recall, for example, the innumerable host of 
meanmgs which are independent of my choice and which I 
discover if I live in a city: streets, houses, shops, streetcars,- 
and buses, directing signs, warning sounds, music on the 
radio, etc. In solitude, of course, I should discover the brute 
and unpredictable existence — this rock, for example — and I 
should limit myself, in short, to making there be a rock; that 
is, that there should be this existent here and outside of it 
nothing. Nevertheless I should confer on it its meaning as “to 
be climbed,” “to be avoided,” “to be contemplated,” etc. 
When there where the street curves, I discover a building, it 
is not only a brute existent which I reveal in the -world; 
I do not only cause there to be a “this” qualified in this or 
that way; but the meaning of the object which is revealed 
then resists me and remains independent of me. I discover 
that the property is an apartment house, or a group of offices 
belonging to the Gas Company, or a prison, etc. The meaning 
here is contingent, independent of my choice; it is presented 
with the same indifference as the reality of the in-itself; it is 
inade a thing and is not distinguished from the quality of 
the in-itself. Similarly the coefficient of adversity in things is 
revealed to me before being experienced by me. Hosts of 
notices put me on my guard: “Reduce Speed. Dangerous 
curve,” “Slow. School,” “Danger,” “Narrow Bridge 100 feet 
ahead,” etc. But these meanings while deeply imprinted on 
things and sharing in their indifferent exteriority — at least in 
appearance — are nonetheless indications for a conduct' to be 
adopted, and they directly concern me. I shall cross the street 
in the lanes indicated. I shall go into this particular shop to 
buy this particular instrument, and a page with directions for 
using it is given to buyers. Later I shall use this instrument a 
pen, for example, to fill out this or that printed form under 
determined conditions. 

Am I not going to find in all this strict limits to my free- 


656 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

dom? If I do not follow point by point the direction 
furnished by others, I shall lose my bearings, I shall 
take the wrong street, I shall miss my train, etc. More- 
over these notices are most often imperatives: “Enter 
here,” “Go out here.” Such is the meaning of the words 
“Entrance” and “Exit” painted over doorways. I obey. They 
come to add to the coefficient of adversity which I cause to 
be born in things, a strictly human coefficient of adversity. 
Furthermore if I submit to this organization, I depend on 
it. The benefits which it provides me can cease; come civil 
disturbance, a war, and it is always the items of prime neces- 
sity which become scarce without my having any hand in it. 
I am dispossessed, arrested in my projects, deprived of what 
is necessary in order for me to accomplish my ends. In par- 
ticular we have observed that directions, instructions, orders, 
prohibitions, billboards are addressed to me in so far as I am 
just anybody; to the extent that I obey them, that I fall into 
line, I submit to the goals of a human reality which is just 
anybody and I realize them by just any techniques. I am there- 
fore modified in my own being since I am the ends which 
I have chosen and the techniques which realize them — to any 
ends whatsoever, to any techniques whatsoever, any human 
reality whatsoever. At the same time since the world never 
appears except through the techniques which I use, the 
world — it also — is modified. This world, seen through the 
use which I make of the bicycle, the automobile, the train in 
order that I may traverse the world, reveals to me a counte- 
nance strictly correlative with the means which I employ; 
therefore it is the countenance which the world offers to every- 
body. Evidently it must follow, someone will say, that my 
freedom escapes me on every side; there is no longer a 
situation as the organization of a meaningful world around 
the free choice of my spontaneity; there is a state which is 
imposed upon me. It* is this problem which we must now 
examine. 

There is no doubt that my belonging to an inhabited 
world has the value of a fact. It refers to the original fact 
of the Other’s presence in the world, a fact which, as we have 
seen, can not be deduced from the ontological structure of 
the for-itself. And although this fact only makes our factic- 
ity more deep-rooted, it does not evolve from our facticity 
ill so far as the latter expresses the necessity of the contingency 
the for-itself. Rather we must say: the for-itself exists in 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM "657 

fact; that is, its existence can not be identical with a reality 
engendered in conformity to a law, nor can it be identical 
with a free choice. And among the factual characteristics of 
this “facticity” — i.e., among those which can neither be 
deduced nor proven but which simply “let themselves be 
seen” — there is one of these which we call the existence-in- 
the-world-in-the-presence-of-others. Whether this factual char- 
acteristic does or does not need to be recovered by my 
freedom in order to be efficacious in any manner whatsoever 
is what we shall discuss a little later. Yet the fact remains 
that 'on the level of techniques of appropriating the world, 
the very fact of the Other’s existence results in the fact of 
the collective ownership of techniques. Therefore facticity is 
expressed on this level by the fact of my appearance in a 
world which is revealed to me only by collective and already 
constituted techniques which aim at. making me apprehend 
the world in a form whose meaning has been defined out- 
side of me. These techniques are going to ' determine my 
belonging to collectivities; to the human race, to the nation- 
al collectivity, to the professional and to the family group. 

It is even necessary to underscore this fact further: out- 
side of my beirig-for-others — of which we shall speak later — 
the only positive way which I have to exist my factual be- 
longing to these collectivities is the use which I constantly 
make’ of the techniques which arise from them. Belonging to 
the human race is defined by the use of very elementary 
and very general techniques: to know how to walk, to know 
how to take hold, to know how to pass judgment on the sur- 
face and the relative size of perceived objects, to know how 
to speak, to know how in general to distinguish the true 
from the false, etc. But we do not possess these techniques 
in this abstract and universal form: to know how to speak is 
not to know how to pronounce and understand words in gener- 
al; it is to know how to speak a certain language and by it to 
manifest one’s belonging to humanity on the level of the 
national collectivity. Moreover to know how to speak a lan- 
guage is not to have an abstract and pure knowledge of the 
language as it is defined by academic dictionaries and gram- 
mars; it is to make the language one’s own across the peculiar 
changes and emphasis brought in by one’s province, 
profession, and family. Thus it can be said that the reality of 
our belonging tO the human is our nationality and that the 
reality of our nationality is our belonging to the family, to 



658 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

the region, to the profession, etc., in the sense that the 
reality of speech is language and that reality of language is 
dialect, slang, jargon, etc. And conversely the truth of the 
dialect is the language, the truth of the language is speech. 
This means that the concrete techniques by which we manifest 
our belonging to the family and to the locality refer us to 
more abstract and more general structures which constitute 
its meaning and essence; these refer to others still more 
general until we arrive at the universal and perfectly simple 
essence of any technique whatsoever by which any being 
whatsoever appropriates the world. 

Thus to be French, for example, is only the truth of being 
a Savoyard. But to be a Savoyard is not simply to inhabit 
the high valleys of Savoy; it is, among a thousand other 
things, to ski in the winters, to use the ski as a mode of 
transportation. And precisely, it is to ski according to the 
French method, not that of Arlberg or of Norway.^® But since 
the mountain and the snowy slopes are apprehended only 
through a technique, this is precisely to discover the French 
meaning of ski slopes. In fact according to, whether one will 
employ the Norwegian method, which is better for gentle 
slopes, or the French method, which is better for steep slopes, 
the same slope will appear as steeper or more gentle exactly as 
an upgrade will appear as more or less steep to the bicyclist 
according to whether he will “put himself into neutral or low 
gear.” Thus the French skier employs a French “gear” to de- 
scend the ski fields, and this “gear” reveals to him a particular 
type of slope wherever he may be. This is to say that the 
Swiss or Bavarian Alps, the Telemark, or the Jura will 
always offer to him 'a meaning, difficulties, an instrumental 
complex, or a complex of adversity which are purely 
French. Similarly it would be easy to show that the 
majority of attempts to define the working class amount 
to taking as a criterion production, consumption or a certain 
type of Weltanschauung springing out of an inferiority com- 
plex (Marx-Halbwachs-de Man) ; that is, in all cases certain 
techniques for the elaboration or the appropriation of the 
world across which there is offered what we shall be able to 

“This is a simplification: There are influences and interferences m the 
matters of technique; the Arlberg method has been prevalent with us for a 
long time. The reader will easily be able to re-establish the facts m their - 
complexity. 


being and DOING: FREEDOM 


659 , 


CHXJ-NVJ ^ 

call the “proletarian f 

‘SJUIS ril. tenin.p.e u.an. ..as 

“STSnt a.at f mcug 

ticular class or nation does n ' jj factual existence 
an ontological structure of my to i«eU my 

_i.e., my birth and my certato teSuiques. Now 

the world and ,^„ofchosen confer on the world 

these techniques which I hav ^ m 

its meanings. I* appears th appears to me, with the 

terms of my ends whether Ae world apP ; 

simple, well-marked Wosmoua of te pn^^^ 
or with the face to face with the brute . 

rrl^^ma'^XSd. a French world, 
existent. „jjia or the South, which offers me its mean 

• mrh^ing done anything to disclose them, 

mgs without “yj'a g „y nation- ^ 

Let uslookmoreJ^^ly. a provmce, to; 

f Li^y, m a Professional group^ rtheTicriste 

St“b«Xet:«altVls the professional jargon 

* s^eak it or the Alsatian dialect as a hnguisUc 
and- statistical stud; ouabte 

S°pS?tol,Von“inal Contingency? LinguisUc research cmf 
beSaken’here; ftatistics bring to 

or semantic changes of a given type, they *o roeon 

struct the evolution of a phoneme or a morpheme in a 
riven period so that it appears that the word or the syntac- 
Ll rme is an individual reality with its meaning and its 
history. And in fact individuals seem to have litUe i^u- 
ence^ver the evolution of language. Social facts such as-lnva- 
sions, great thoroughfares, commercial relaUons seem to be 
the essential causes of linguistic changes. But this is because 
the question is not placed on the true level of the concrete. 
Also we find only what we are looking for. , , , 

For a long time psychologists have observed that the word 
is not the concrete element of speech-not even the word 
of the dialect or the word of the family with its pamcular 
variation; the elementary structure of speech is the sentence. 



660 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

It is within the sentence, in fact, that the word can receive 
a real function as a designation; outside of the sentence the 
word is just a propositional function — when it is not a pure 
and simple rubric designed to group absolutely disparate 
meanings. Only when it appears in discourse, does it assume a 
“holophrastic” character, as has often been pointed out. This 
does not mean that the word can be limited by itself to a 
precise meaning but that it is integrated in a context as a sec- 
ondary form in a primary form. The word therefore has only a 
purely virtual existence outside of complex and active orga- 
nizations which integrate it. It can not exist “in” a conscious- 
ness or an unconscious before the use which is made of it; 
the sentence is not made out of words. But we need not be 
content with this. Paulhan has shown in Fleurs de Tarbes 
that entire sentences, “commonplaces,” do not, any more 
than words, pre-exist the use which is made of them. They 
are mere commonplaces if they are looked at from the out- 
side by a reader who recomposes the paragraph by passing 
from one sentence to the next, but they lose their banal and 
conventional character if they are placed within the point of 
view of the author who saw the thing to be expressed and 
who attended to the most pressing things first by producing 
an act of designation or re-creation without slowing down 
to consider the very elements of this act. If this is true, then 
neither the words nor the syntax, nor the “ready-made sen- 
tences” pre-exist the use which was made of them. Since the 
verbal unity is the meaningful sentence, the latter is a con- 
structive act which is conceived only by a transcendence 
which surpasses and nihilates the given toward an end. To 
understand the word in the light of the sentence is very exactly 
to understand any given whatsoever in terms of the situation 
and to understand the situation in the light of the original 
ends. 

To understand a sentence spoken by my companion - is, 
in fact, to understand what he “means”— that is, to 
espouse his movement of transcendence, to throw myself 
with him toward possibles, toward ends, and to return again 
to the ensemble of organized means so as to understand them 
by their function and their end. The spoken language, more- 
over, is always interpreted in terms of the situation. Refer- 
ences to the weather, to time, to place, to the environment, 
to the situation of the city, of the province, of the country 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


661 


are given before the wordA® It is enough for me to have read 
the papers arid to have seen Pierre’s healthy appearance 
and anxious expression in order for me to understand the 
“Things aren’t so good” with which he greets me this morn- 
ing. It is not his health which “is not so good” since he has 
a rosy complexion, nor is it 'his business nor his household; 
it is the situation of our city or of our country. I knew it 
already. In asking him; “How goes it?,” I was already out- 
lining an interpretation of his reply; I transported myself 
already to the four corners of the horizon, ready to return 
from there to Pierre in order to understand him. To listen 
to conversation is to “speak with,” not simply because we 
imitate in order to interpret, but because we must under- 
stand in terms of the world. 

But if the sentence pre-exists the word, then we are re- 
ferred to the speaker as the concrete foundation of his speech. 
A word can indeed seem to have a “life” of its own if 
one comes upon it in sentences of various epochs. This 
borrowed life resembles that of an object in a film fantasy; 
for example, a knife which by itself starts slicing a pear. 
It is effected by the juxtaposition of instantaneities; it is 
cinematographic and is constituted in universal time. But 
if words appear to live when one projects a semantic or 
morphological film, they are not going to constitute whole 
sentences; they are only the tracks of the passage of sentences 
as highways are only the tracks of the passage of pilgrims 
or caravans. The sentence is a project which can be inter- 
preted only in terms of the nihilation of a given (the very 
one which one wishes to designate) in terms of a posited 
end (its designation which itself supposes other ends in 
relation to which it is only a means) . K the given can not 
determine the sentence any more than the word can, if on 
the contrary the sentence is necessary to illuminate the given 
and to make the word understandable, then the sentence is 
a moment of the free choice of myself, and it is as such that 
it is understood by my companion. If a language is the reality 
of speech, if a dialect or jargon is the reality of a language, 
then the reality of the dialect is the free acf of designation 
by which I choose myself as designating. And this free act 

i®We are intentionally oversimplifying. There are influences and interfer- 
ences. But the reader will be able to re-establish the facts in their compIe.xity. 
(Tr. The French text does not indicate whether this footnote belongs with 
this sentence or with a sentence in the preceding paragraph. The exact posi- 
tion can hardly be important.) 



662 


BEING AND NOTPIINGNESS 

can not be an cissenibliiig of words. Xo be sure, if it were 
a pure assembling of words in conformity with technical 
prescriptions (grammatical laws), we could speak of factual 
limits imposed on the freedom of the speaker; these limits 
would be marked by the material and phonetic nature of the 
words, the vocabulary of the language employed, the per- 
sonal vocabulary of the speaker (the n words which he has 
at his command), the “spirit of the language,” etc., etc. 
But we have just shown that such is not the case. It has 
been maintained recently that there is a sort of living order 
of words, of the dynamic laws of speech, an impersonal 
life of the logos — in short that speech is a Nature and that 
to some extent man must obey it in order to make use of 
it as he does with Nature.” But this is because people in 
considering speech frequently wUl take speech that is dead 
(/.£?., already spoken) and infuse into it an impersonal life 
and force, affinities and repulsions all of which in fact 
have been borrowed from the personal freedom of the for- 
itself which spoke. People have made of speech a language 
which speaks all by itself. This is an error which should 
not be made with regard to speech or any other technique. 
If we are to make man arise in the midst of techniques which 
are applied all by themselves, of a language which speaks 
itself, of a science which constructs itself, of a city which 
builds itself according to its own laws, if meanings are fixed 
in in-itself while we preserve a human transcendence, then 
the role of man will be reduced to that of a pilot employing 
the determined forces of winds, waves, and tides in order 
to direct a ship. But gradually each technique in order to be 
directed toward human ends will require another technique; 
for example, to direct a boat, it is necessary to speak. Thus we 
shall perhaps arrive at the technique of techniques — which 
in turn will be applied by itself — but we shall have lost for- 
ever the possibility of meeting the technician. 

If on the other hand, it is by speaking that we cause words 
to exist, we do not thereby suppress the necessary technical 
connections or the connections in fact which are articulated 
inside the sentence. Better yet, we foimd this necessity. But 
in order for it to appear, in order for words to enter into 
relations with one another, in order for them to latch on to 
one another or repulse one another, it is necessary that they 
be united in a synthesis which does not come from them. 

* Brice-Parain. Essal sur la logos platoniclen. 



663 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


Suppress this synthetic unity and the block which is called 
“speech” disintegrates; each word returns to its solitude and 
at the same time loses its unity, being parcelled out among 
various incommunicable meanings. Thus it is within the 
free project of the sentence that the laws of speech are organ- 
ized; it is by speaking that I make grammar. Freedom is the 
only possible foundation of the laws of language. 
Furthermore, for whom do the laws of language exist? 
Paulhan has given the essential answer: they are not for the 
one who speaks, they are for the one who listens. The person 
who speaks is only the choice of a meaning and apprehends 
the order of the words only in so far as he makes The 
only relations which he will grasp within this organized 
complex are specifically those which he has established. Con- 
sequently if we discover that two (or several) words hold 
between them not one but several defined relations and that 
there results from this a multiplicity of meanings which are 
arranged in an hierarchy or- opposed to each other — all for 
one and the same sentence — if, in short, we discover the 
“Devil’s share,” this can be only under the two following 
conditions: (1) The words must have been assembled and 
presented by a meaningful rapprochement; (2) this synthesis 
must be seen from outside — i.e„ by The Other and in the 


course of a hypothetical deciphering of the possible meanings 
of this rapprochement. In this case, in fact, each word grasp^ 
first as a square of meaning is bound to another word similar- 
ly apprehended. And the rapprochement will be multivocal. 
The apprehension of the true meaning (/.e., the one express- 
ly willed by the speaker) will be able to put other mean- 
ings, in the shade or subordinate them, but it will not suppress 
&em. Thus speech, which is a free project for me, has specif- 
ic laws for others. And these laws themselves can come 
into play only within an original synthesis. 

Thus we can grasp the clear distinction between the event 
sentence” and a natural event. The natural fact is produced 
in conformity to a law which it manifests but which is a 
purely external rule of production of which the considered 
tact is only one example. The “sentence” as an event contains 
within Itself the law of its organization, and it is inside the ' 

terce one'a sen- 

respect to \ ^ ^dopt with 



664 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

free project of designating that legal (z.e., grammatical) 
relations can arise between the words. In fact, there can be 
no laws of speaking before one speaks. And each utterance is 
a free project of designation issuing from the choice of a 
personal for-itself and destined to be interpreted in terms of 
the global situation of this for-itself. What is primary is 
the situation in terms of which I understand the meaning 
of the sentence; this meaning is not in itself to be considered 
as a given but rather as an end chosen in a free surpassing of 
means. Such is the only reality which the working linguist 
can encounter. From the standpoint of this reality a regressive 
analytical work will be able to bring to light certain more 
general and more simple structures which are like legal 
schemata. But these schemata which would function as laws, 
of dialect, for example, are in themselves abstract. Far from 
presiding over the constitution of the sentence and being the 
mould into which it flows, they exist only in and through this 
sentence. In this sense the sentence appears as a free inven- 
tion of its own laws. We find here simply the original charac- 
teristic of every situation; it is by its very surpassing of the 
given as such (the linguistic apparatus) that the free project 
of the sentence causes the given to appear as this given (these 
laws of word order and dialectal pronunciation). But the 
free project of the sentence is precisely a scheme to assume 
this given; it is not just any assumption but is aimed at a not 
yet existing end across existing means on which it confers 
their exact meaning as a rneans. 

Thus the sentence is the order of words which become 
these words only by means of their very order. This is 
indeed what linguists and psychologists have perceived, 
and their embarrassment can be of use to us here as a counter- 
proof; they believed that they discovered a circle in the formu- 
lation of speaking, for in order to speak it is necessary to 
know one’s thought. But how can we know this thought as 
a reality made explicit and fixed in concepts except precisely 
by speaking it? Thus speech refers to thought and thought 
to speech. But we understand now that there is no circle or 
rather that this circle — from which linguists and psycholo- 
gists believed they could escape by the invention of pure 
psychological idols such as the verbal image or an imageless, 
wordless thought — is not xmique with speech; it is the char- 
acteristic of the situation in general. It means nothing else 
but the ekstatic connection of the present, the future, and the 



665 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 

past — that is, the free determination of the existent by the 
not-yet-existing and the determination of the not-yet-exist- 
ing by the existent. Once we have established this fact, it will 
be permissible to uncover abstract operational schemata which 
will stand as the legal truth of the sentence: the dialectal 
schema — the schema of the national language — ^the linguistic 
schema in general. But these schemata far from pre-existing 
the concrete sentence are in themselves affected with Unselb- 
stdndigkeit and exist always only incarnated and sustained in 
their very incarnation by a freedom. 

It must be understood, of course, that speech is here only 
the example of one social and universal technique. The 
same would be true for any other technique. It is the blow 
of , the axe which reveals the axe, it: is the hammering which 
reveals the hammer. It will be permissible in a particular run 
to reveal the French method of skiing and in this method 
the general skill of skiing as a human possibility. But this 
human skill is never anything by itself alone; it exists only 
potentially; it is incarnated and manifested in the actual and 
concrete skill of the skier. This enables us to 'outline tenta- 
tively a solution for the relations of the individual to the 
race. Without the human race, mankind, there is no truth; 
that is certain. There would remain only an irrational and 
contingent swarming of individual choices to which no law 
could be assigned. If some sort of truth exists capable of 
unifying the individual choices, it is the human race which 
can furnish this truth for us. But if the race is the truth of 
the individual, it can not be a given in the individual without 
profound contradiction. As the laws of speech are sustained 
by and incarnated ia the concrete free project of the sen- 
tence, so the human race (as an ensemble of peculiar tech- 
niques to define the activity of men), far from pre-existing 
an individual who would manifest it in the way' that this 
particular fall exemplifies the law of the falling bodies, is the 
ensemble of abstract relations sustained by the free individ- 
ual choice. The for-itself in order to choose itself as a person 
effects the existence of an internal organization which the for- 
itself surpasses toward itself, and this internal technical organi- 
zation is in it the national or the human. 

Ve^ weU, someone will say. But you have dodged the 
question. For these linguistic organizations or techniques 
have not been created by the for-itself so that it may find itself; 
it has got them from others. The rule for the agreement of 



666 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

participles does not exist, I admit, outside of the free rap- 
prochement of concrete participles in view of an end with 
a particular designation. But when I employ this rule, I have 
learned it from others; it is because others in their personal 
projects cause it to be and I make use of it myself. My 
speech is then subordinated to the speech of others and , 
ultimately to the national speech. 

We should not think of denying this fact. For that mat- 
ter our problem is not to show that the for-itself is the free 
foundation of its being; the for-itself is free but within a condi- 
tion, and it is the relation of this condition to freedom that we 
are trying to define by making clear the meaning of the situa- 
tion. What we have just established, in fact, is only a part of 
reality. We have shown that the existence of meanings which 
do not emanate from the for-itself can not constitute an 
external limit of its freedom. As a for-itself one is not man 
first in order to be oneself subsequently and one does not 
constitute oneself as oneself in terms of a human essence 
given a priori. Quite the contrary, it is in its effort to 
choose itself as a personal self that the for-itself sustains in 
existence certain social and abstract characteristics which make 
of it a man (or a woman); and the necessary connections 
which accompany the essential elements of man appear only 
on the foundation of a free choice; in this sense each for-itself 
is responsible in its being for the existence of a human race. 
But it is necessary for us again to stress the undeniable fact 
that the for-itself can choose itself only beyond certain mean- 
ings of which it is not the origin. Each for-itself, in fact, is a 
for-itself only by choosing itself beyond nationality and 
race just as it speaks only by choosing the designation be- 
yond the syntax and morphemes. This “beyond” is enough 
to assure its total independence in relation to the structures 
which it siurpasses; but the fact remains that it constitutes 
itself as beyond in relation to these particular structures. 
What does this mean? It means that the for-itself arises in 
a world which is a world for other for-itselfs. Such is the 
given. And thereby, as we have seen, the meaning of the 
world is alien to the for-itself. This means simply that each 
man ^ds himself in the presence of meanings which do not 
come into the world through him. He arises in a world which 
is given to him as already looked-at, furrowed, explored, 
worked over in all its meanings, and whose very contex- 
ture is already defined by these investigations. In the very 



BEING, AND DOING: FREEDOM 667 

act by which he unfolds his , time, he temporalizes himself 
in a world whose temporal meaning is already defined by 
other temporalizations: this is the fact of simultaneity. We 
are not dealing here with a limit of freedom; rather it is 
in this world that the for-itself must be free; that is, it 
must choose itself by taking into account these circumstances 
and not ad libitum. But on the other hand, the for-itself — 
i.e., man — in rising up does not merely suffer the Other’s 
existence; he is compelled to make the Other’s existence man- 
ifest to himself in the form of a choice.. For it is by a choice 
that he will apprehend the Other as The-Other-as-subject 
or as The-Other-as-object.^^ Inasmuch as the Other is for him 
the Other-as-a-look, there can be no question of techniques 
or of foreign - meanings; the for-itself experiences itself as 
an object in the Universe beneath the Other’s look. But 
as soon as the for-itself by surpassing the Other toward its 
ends makes of him a transcendence-transcended, that 
which was a free surpassing of the given toward ends appears 
to it as meaningful, given conduct in the world (fixed in 
in-itself). The Other-as-object becomes an indicator of ends 
and by its own free project, the For-itself throws itself into 
a world' in which conducts-as-objects designate ends. Thus 
the Other’s presence as a transcended transcendence reveals 
given complexes of means to ends. And as the end decides 
the means and the means the end by its upsurge in the face 
of the Other-as-object, the For-itself causes ends in the 
world -to be indicated to itself; it comes into a world peopled 
by ends. But if consequently the techniques and their ends 
arise in the look of the For-itself, we must necessarily recog- 
nize that it is by means of the free assumption of a position 
by the For-iself confronting the Other that they become 
techniques. The Other by himself alone can not cause these 
projects to be revealed to the For-itself as techniques; and due 
to this fact there exists for the Other, in so far as he tran- 
scends himself toward his possibles, no technique but a con- 
crete doing which is defined in terms of his individual end. 
The shoe-repairer who puts a new sole on a shoe does not 
experience himself as “in the process of applying a tech- 
nique’’; he apprehends the situation as demanding this or 
,that action, that particular piece of leather, as requiring a 
hammer, etc. The For-itself, as soon as it assumes a position 

“ We shall see later that the problem is more complex. But these remarks 
are sufficient for the present. 



668 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

^jjji rGspsct to ths Other, esuses techniques to urise in the 
world as the conduct of the Other as a transcendence-tran- 
scended. It is at this moment and this moment only that 
there appear in the world— bourgeois and workers, French 
and Germans, in short, men. 

Thus the For-itself is responsible for the fact that the 
Other’s conduct is revealed in the world as techniques. The 
for-itself can not cause the world in which it arises to be 
furrowed by this or that particular technique (it can not make 
itself appear in a world which is “capitalistic” or “governed 
by a natural economy” or in a “parasitic civilization"), but it 
causes that which is lived by the Other as a free project to 
exist outside as technique; the for-itself achieves this precisely 
by making itself the one by whom an outside comes to the 
Other. Thus it is by choosing itself and by historicizing itself 
in the world that the For-itself historicizes the world itself 
and causes it to be dated by its techniques. Henceforth, pre- 
cisely because the techniques appear as objects, the For-itself 
can choose to appropriate them. By arising in a world in 
which Pierre and Paul speak in a certain way, stick to the 
right when driving a bicycle or a car, etc., and by constituting 
these free patterns of conduct into meaningful objects, the 
For-itself is responsible for the fact that there is a world in 
which they stick to the right, in which they speak French, 
etc. It causes the internal laws of the Other’s act, which were 
originally founded and sustained by a freedom engaged in a 
project, to become now objective rules of the conduct-as- 
object; and these rules become universally valid for all anal- 
ogous conduct, while the supporter of the conduct or the 
agent-as-object becomes simply anybody. This historization, 
which is the effect of the for-itself’s free choice, in no way 
restricts its freedom; quite the contrary, it is in this world 
^d no other that its freedom comes into play; it is in connec- 
tion with its existence in this world that it puts itself into 
question. For to be free is not to choose the historic world in 
which one arises — ^which would have no meaning — but to 
choose oneself in the world whatever this may be. 

In this sense it would be absurd to suppose that a certain 
state of techniques is restrictive to human possibilities. Of 
course a contemporary of Duns Scotus is ignorant of the use 
of the automobile or the airplane; but he appears as ignorant 
to us and only from our point of view because we privately 
apprehend him in terms of a world where the automobile and 


. BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 669 

the airplane exist. For him, who has no relation of any kind 
with these objects and the techniques which refer to them, 
there exists a kind of absolute, unthinkable, and undecipher- 
able nothingness. Such a nothingness can in no way limit the 
For-itself which is choosing itself; it can not'be apprehended 
as a lack, no matter how we consider it. The For-itself which 
historicizes itself in the time of Duns Scotus therefore nihilates 
itself in the heart of a fullness of being — ^that is, of a world 
which like ours is everything which it can be. It would be 
absurd to declare that the Albigenses lacked heavy artillery to 
use in resisting Simon de Montfort; for the Seigneur de Tren- 
cavel or the Comte de Toulouse chose themselves such as 
they were in a world in which artillery had no place: they 
viewed politics in that world; they made plans for military 
resistance in that world; they chose themselves as sympathizers 
with the Cathari in that world; and as they were only what 
they chose to be, they were absolutely in a world as absolutely 
fuU as that of the Panzerdivisionen or of the R.A.F. 

What is true for material techniques applies as well to more 
subtle techniques.' The fact of existing as a petty noble in 
Languedoc at the time of Raymond VI is not determining if 
it is placed in,jhe feudal world in which this lord exists and 
in which he chooses himself. It appears as privative only if 
we commit the error of considering this division of Francia 
and of the Midi from the actual point of view of French unity. 
The feudal world offered to the vassal lord of Raymond VI in- 
finite-possibilities of choice; we do not possess more. A ques- 
tion just as absurd is often posited in a kind of utopian 
dream: what would Descartes have been if he had known' of 
contemporary physics? This is to suppose that Descartes 
possesses an a priori nature more or less limited and altered 
by the state of science in his time and that we could transport 
this brute nature to the contemporary period in which it 
would react to more extensive and more exact knowledge. But 
this is to forget that Descartes is what he has chosen to be, 
that he is an absolute choice of himself from the standpoint 
of a world of various kinds of knowledge and of techniques 
which this choice both assumes and illuminates. Descartes is 
an absolute upsurge at an absolute date and is perfectly un- 
thinkable at another date, for he has made his date by making 
himself. It is he and not another who has determined the exact 
state of the mathematical knowledge immediately before bim_, 
not by an empty inventory which would be made from no 



670 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

point of view and would be related to no axis of coordina- 
tion, but by establishing the principles of analytical geometry 
— that is, by inventing precisely the axis of coordinates which 
would permit us to define the state of this knowledge. Here 
again it is free invention and the future which enable us to 
illuminate the present; it is the perfecting of the technique in 
view of an end which enables us to evaluate the state of the 
technique. 

Thus when the For-itself affirms itself in the face of the 
Other-as-object, by the same stroke it reveals techniques. Con- 
sequently it can appropriate them — that is, interiorize them. 
But suddenly there are the following consequences: (1) By 
employing a technique, the For-itself surpasses the technique 
toward its own end; it is always beyond the technique which 
it employs. (2) The technique which was originally a pure, 
meaningful conduct fixed in some Other-as-object, now, be- 
cause it is interiorized, loses its character as a technique and is 
integrated purely and simply in the free surpassing of the 
given toward ends; it is recovered and sustained by the free- 
dom which founds it exactly as dialect or speech is sustained 
by the free project of the sentence. Feudalism as a technical 
relation between man and man does not exist; it is only a pure 
abstract, sustained and surpassed by the thousands of individ- 
ual projects of a particular man who is a liege in relation to 
his lord. By this we by no means intend to arrive at a sort of 
historical nominalism. We do not mean that feudalism is the 
sum of the relations of vassals and suzerains. On the contrary, 
we hold that it is the abstract structure of these relations; 
every project of a man of this.time must be realized as a sur- 
passing toward the concrete of this abstract moment It is 
therefore not necessary to generalize in terms of numerous de- 
tailed experiences in order to establish the principles of the_ 
feudal technique; this technique exists necessarily and com- 
pletely in each individual conduct and it can be brought to 
light in each case. But it is there only to be surpassed. In the 
same way the For-itself can not be a person — i.e., choose 
the ends which it is — without being a man or woman, a mem- 
ber of a national collectivity, of a class, of family, etc. But 
these are abstract structures which the For-itself sustains and 
surpasses by its project. It makes itself French, a man of a 
southern province, a workman in order to be itself at the hori- 
zon of these determinations. Similarly the world which is re- 
vealed to the For-itself appears as provided with certain mean- 



671 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 

ings correlative with the techniques adopted. It appears as a 
world-for-the-Frenchman, a world-for-the-worker, etc,, with 
all the characteristics which would - be expected. But these 
characteristics do not possess Selbstdndigkeit. The world 
which allows itself to be revealed as French, proletarian, etc., 
is before all else a world which is illuminated by the For- 
itself’s own ends, its own world. 

Nevertheless the Other’s existence brings a factual limit 
to my freedom. This is because of the fact that by means of 
the upsurge of the Other there appear certain determinations 
which I am without having chosen them. Here I am — ^Jew or 
Aryan, handsome or ugly, one-armed, etc. All this I am 
for the Other with no hope of apprehending this meaning 
which I have outside and, still more important, with no hope 
of changing it. Speech alone will inform me of what I am; 
again this will never be except as the object of an empty in- 
tention; any intuition of it is forever denied me. If my race or 
my physical appearance were only an image in the Other or 
the Other’s opinion of me, we should soon have done with it; 
but we have seen that we are dealing with objective character- 
istics which define me m my being-for-others. As soon as a 
freedom other than mine arises confronting me, I begin to 
exist in a new dimension of being; and this time it is not a 
question of my conferring a meaning on brute existents or 
of accepting responsibility on my own account for the mean- 
ing which Others have conferred on certain objects. It is I 
myself who see a meaning conferred upon me, and I do not 
have the recourse of accepting the responsibility of this mean- 
ing which I have since it can not be given to me except in the 
^ form of an empty indication. Thus something of myself-^ac- 
- cording to this new dimension — exists in the manner of the 
given; at least for me, since this being which I am is suffered, 
it is without being existed. I learn of it and suffer it in and 
through the relations which I enter into with others, in and 
through their conduct with regard to me. I encounter this 
being at the origin of a thousand prohibitions and a thou- 
sand resistances which I bump up against at each instant: Be- 
cause I am a minor I shall not have this or that privilege. Be- - 
cause 1 am a Jew I shall be deprived — in certain societies — 
of certain possibilities, etc. Yet I am unable in any way to 
feel myself as a Jew or as a minor or as a Pariah. It is at this 
point that I can react against these interdictions by declaring 
that race, for example, is purely and simply a collective fiction. 



672 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

that only individuals exist. Thus here I suddenly encounter 
the total alienation of my person! I am something which 
have not chosen to be. )A^at is going to be the result of this 
for the situation? 

We must recognize that we have just encountered a real 
limit to our freedom — that is, a way of being which is im- 
posed on us without our freedom being its foundation. Still it 
is necessary to understand this: the limit imposed does not 
come from the action of others. In a preceding chapter we 
observed that even torture does not dispossess us of our free- 
dom; when we give in, we do so freely. In a more general 
way the encounter with a prohibition in my path (“No Jews 
allowed here,” or “Jewish restaurant. No Aryans allowed,” 
etc.) refers us to the case considered earlier (collective tech- 
niques), and this prohibition can have meaning only on and 
through the foundation of my free choice. In fact according 
to the free possibilities which I choose, I can disobey the 
prohibition, pay no attention to it, or, on the contrary, confer 
upon it a coercive value which it can hold only because of the 
weight which I attach to it. Of course the prohibition fully 
retains its character as an “emanation from an alien will”; of 
course it has for its specific structure the fact of taking me 
for an object and thereby manifesting a transcendence which 
transcends me. Still the fact remains that it is not incarnated 
in my universe, and it loses its peculiar force of compulsion 
only within the limits of my own choice and according to 
whether under any circumstances I prefer life to death or 
whether, on the contrary, I judge that in certain particular 
cases death is preferable to certain kinds of life, etc. The 
true limit of my freedom lies purely and simply in the very 
fact that an Other apprehends me as the Other-as-object and 
in that second corollary fact that my situation ceases for the 
Other to be a situation and becomes an objective form in 
which I exist as an objective structure. It is this alienating 
process of making an object of my situation which is the con- 
stant and specific limit of my situation, just as the making an 
object of my being-for-itself in being-for-others is the limit pf 
my being. And it is precisely these two characteristic linuts 
which represent the boundaries of my freedom. 

In short, by the fact- of the Other’s existence, I exist in a 
situation which has an outside and which due to this very 
fact has a dimension of alienation which I can in no way re- 
move from the situation any more than I can act directly upon 



673 


BEING AND DOING; FREEDOM 

it. This limit to my freedom is, as we see, posited by the 
Other’s pure and simple existence — ^that is, by the fact that 
my transcendence exists for a transcendence. Thus we grasp a 
truth of great importance: we saw e^lier, keeping ourselves 
within the compass of existence-for-itself, that only my free- 
dom can limit my freedom; we see now, when we include 
the Other’s existence in our considerations, that my freedom 
on t his new level finds its limits also in the existence of the 
Other’s freedom. Thus on whatever level we place ourselves, 
the only limits which a freedom can encounter are found in 
freedom. Just as thought according to Spinoza can be limited 
only by thought, so freedom can be limited only by freedom. 
Its limitation as internal finitude stems from the fact that it 
can not not-be freedom — ^that is, it is condemned to be free; 
its limitation as external finitude stems from the fact that 
being freedom, it is for other freedoms, freedoms which freely 
apprehend it in the light of their own ends. 

Once this is posited, we must observe first that this 
alienation of the situation does not represent an inner 
flaw nor the introduction of the given as a brute resistance 
in the situation such as I live it. Quite the contrary, the 
alienation is neither an inner modification nor a partial 
change of the situation; it does not appear in the course of the 
temporalization; I never encounter it in the situation, and it is 
consequently never released to my intuition. But on princi- 
ple it escapes me; it is the very exteriority of the situation — 
that is, its being-outside-for-others. Therefore we have to do 
with an essential characteristic of all situations in general; this 
characteristic can not act upon its content, but it is accepted 
and_recovered by the same being who puts himself into a sit- 
uation. Thus the very meaning of our free choice is to cause 
a situation to arise which expresses this choice, a situation 
the essential characteristic of which is to be alienated; that is, 
to exist as a form in itself for the Other. We can not escape 
this alienation since it would be absurd even to think of 
existing otherwise than in situation. This characteristic is not 
manifested by an internal resistance; on the contrary, one 
makes proof of it in and through its very inapprehensibility. 
It is therefore ultimately not a head-on obstacle which free- 
dom encounters but a sort of centrifugal force in the very 
natme of freedom, a weakness in the basic “stuff” of freedom 
which causes everything which it undertakes to have always 
one face which freedom will not have chosen, which escapes 



674 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


it and which for the Other will be pure existence. A freedom 
which would will itself freedom could by the same token wiU 
only this character. Yet this character does not belong to the 
nature of freedom; for there is here no nature; moreover if 
there were one, this characteristic could not be deduced from 
it since Others’ existence is an entirely contingent fact. To 
come into the world as a freedom confronting Others is to 
come into the world as alienable. -If to will oneself free is to 
choose to be in this world confronting Others, then the one 
who wills himself such must will also the passion of his 
freedom. 

On the other hand, I do not objectively disclose and 
establish the alienated situation and my own being-alienated. 
In the first place, indeed, we have just seen that on principle 
everything which is alienated exists only for the Other. But 
in addition a pure establishment, even if it were possible, 
would be insufficient. In fact I can not make proof of this 
alienation without by the same stroke recognizing the Other 
as a transcendence. And this recognition, as we have seen, 
would have no meaning if it were not a free recognition of 
the Other’s freedom. By this free recognition of the Other 
across the proof which I make of my alienation, I assume my 
being-for-others, whatever it may be, and I assume it precisely 
because it is my link with the Other. Thus I can apprehend 
the Other as a freedom only within the free project of appre- 
hending him as such (in fact it always remains possible for 
me to apprehend the Other freely as an object) ; and the free 
project of the recognition of the Other is not distinct from 
the free assumption of my being-for-others. 

Now then we can see how my freedom in a way recovers its 
own limits, for I can grasp myself as limited by the Other 
only in so far as the Other exists for me, and I can make the 
Other exist for me only as a subjectivity recognized by my 
assuming my being-for-others. There is no circle here. By 
the free assumption of this being-alienated which I ex- 
perience, I suddenly make the Other’s transcendence exist for 
me as such. It is only by my recognizing the freedom of anti-* 
Semites (whatever use they may make of it) and by my^ 
assuming this being-a-Jew that I am a Jew for them; it is only 
thus that being-a-Jew will appear as the external objective 
limit of the situation. If, on the contrary, it pleases me to 
consider the anti-Semites as pure objects, then my being-a- 
Jew disappears immediately to give place to the simple con- 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 675 

sciousness (of) being a free, unqualiBable transcendence. To 
recognize others and, if I am a Jew, to assume my being-a-Jew 
are one and the same. Thus the Other’s freedom confers limits 
on my situation, but I can experience these limits only if I 
recover this being-for-others which I am and if I give to it a 
meaning in the light of the ends which I have chosen. Of 
course, this very assumption is alienated; it has its outside, 
but it is through this assumption that I can experience my 
being-outside as outside. 

How then shall I experience the objective limits of my 
being: Jew, Aryan, ugly, handsome, Idnd, a civil servant, 
untouchable, etc. — ^when will speech have informed me 
as to which of these are my limits? It can not be in the 
way in which I intuitively apprehend the Other’s beauty, 
ugliness, race, nor in the way in which I have a non-thetic 
consciousness (of) projecting myself toward this or that 
possibility. It is not that these objective characteristics must 
necessarily be abstract; some are abstract, others not. My 
beauty or my ugliness or the insignificance of my features axe 
apprehended by the Other in their full concreteness, and 
it is this^concreteness which the Other’s speech will indicate 
to me; it is toward this that I shall emptily direct myself. 
Therefore we are not dealing with an abstraction but with an 
ensemble of structures, of which certam are abstract but whose 
totality is an absolute concrete, an ensemble which simply is 
indicated to me as on principle escaping me. This ensemble 
is in fact what I am. Now we observed at the beginning of 
Part Two that the for-itself can not be anything. For-myself 
I am not a professor jot a waiter in a cafe, nor am I handsome 
or ugly, Jew or Aryan, spiritual, vulgar, or distinguished. 
We shall call these characteristics unrealizables. We must be 
careful not to confuse them with the imaginary. We have to 
do with perfectly real existences; but those for which these 
characteristics are really given are not these characteristics, 
and I who am them can not realize them. If I am told that I 
am vulgar, for example, I have often grasped by intuition as re- 
gards others the nature of vulgarity; thus I can apply the word 
“vulgar” to my person. But I can not join the meaning of 
this word to my person. There is here exactly the indication 
of a connection to be effected but one which could be made 
only by an interiorization and a subjectivizing of the vulgarity 
or by the objectivizing of the person — two operations 



676 - , BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

which involve the immediate collapse of the reality in 
question. 

Thus we are surrounded by an infinity of unrealizables. 
Certain among these unrealizables we feel vividly as irritating 
absences. Who has not felt a profound disappointment at 
not being able after his return from a long exile to realize 
that he "is in Paris”? The objects are there and offer them- 
selves familiarly, but I am only an absence, only the pure 
nothingness which is necessary in order that there may be a 
Paris. My friends, my relatives offer the image of a promised 
land when they say to me: “At last you are here! You have 
returned! You are in Paris!” But access to this promised 
land is wholly denied me. And if the majority of people 
deserve the reproach of “applying a double standard” accord- 
ing to whether they are considering others or themselves, if 
when they perceive that they are guilty of a fault which they 
had blamed in someone else the day before, they have a 
tendency to say, “That’s not the same thing,” this is because 
in fact “it is not the same thing.” The one action is a given 
object of moral evaluation; the other is a pure transcendence 
which carries its justification in its very existence since its 
being is a choice. We shall be able to convince its agent by 
a comparison of the results that the two acts have a strictly 
identical “outside,” but the best will in the world will not 
allow him to realize this identity. Here is the source of a 
good part of the troubles of the moral consciousness, in par- 
ticular despair at not being able truly to condemn oneself, 
at not being able to realize oneself as guilty, at feeling per- 
petually a gap between the expr;essed meaning of the words: 
“I am guilty, I have sinned,” etc., and the' real apprehension 
of the situation. In short this is the origin of all the anguish 
of a “bad conscience,”^^ that is, the consciousness of bad 
faith which has for its ideal a self-judgment — i.e., taking 
toward oneself the point of view of the Other. 

But if some particular kind of unrealizables have impressed 
us more than others, if they have become the object of 
psychological descriptions, they must not blind us to the 
fact that unrealizables are infinite in number since they repre- 
sent the reverse side of the situation. 

20 Xr. There is no distinction in French between “conscience” and "con- 
sciousness,” both of winch are expressed by the word conscience. This is, I 

e eve, the only passage in Being and Nothingness in which Sartre intends 
to emphasize the idea of a “conscience” (English sense). 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 677 

These unrealizables, however, are not only appresented to 
us as unrealizables; in fact in order that they may have the 
character of unrealizables, they must be revealed in the light 
of some project aiming at realizing them. This is indeed 
what we noted earlier when we were showing how the 
for-itself assumes its being-for-others in and by the very act 
which recognizes the existence of others. Correlatively there- 
fore with this assuming project, the unrealizables are revealed 
as to be realized. At first, indeed, the assumption is made 
in the perspective of my fundamental project. I do not 
limit myself to receiving passively the meaning “ugliness,” 
“infirmity,” “race,” etc., but, on the contrary, 1 can grasp these 
characteristics — ^in the simple capacity of a meaning — only 
in the light of my own ends. This is what is expressed — but by 
completely reversing the terms — when it is said that the fact 
of being of a certain race can determine a reaction of pride or 
the ugliness can appear only within the limits of my own 
choice of inferiority or of pride;^^ in other words, they can 
appear only with a meaning which my freedom confers on 
them. This means once again that they are for the Other but 
that they can be for me only if I choose them. The law of my 
freedom which makes me unable to be without choosing 
myself applies here too: I do not choose to be for the 
Other what I am, but I can try to be for myself what I am 
for the Other, by choosing myself such as I appear to the 
Other — i.e., by an elective assumption. A Jew is not a Jew 
first in order to be subsequently ashamed or proud; it is 
his pride of being a Jew, his shame, or his indifference 
which will reveal to him his being-a-Jew; and this being- 
’ a-Jew is nothing outside the free manner of adopting it. 
Although I have at my disposal an infinity of ways of assum- 
ing my being-for-others, / am not able not to assume it. 
We find here again that condemnation to freedom which we 
defined above as facticity. I can neither abstain totally in 
relation to what I am (for the Other) — ^for to refuse is not 
to abstain but still to assume — nor can I submit to it passively 
(which in a sense amounts to the same thing). Whether in 
fury, hate, pride, shame, disheartened refusal or joyous de- 
mand, it is necessary for me to choose to be what I am. 

Thus the unrealizables are revealed to the for-itself as 
“unrealizables-to-be-realized.” They do not thereby lose their 

^ Or of any other choice of my ends. 



678 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

character as limits; quite the contrary, it is as objective and 
external limits that they are presented to the for-itself as 
to be interiorized. They have therefore a character which is 
distinctly obligatory. In fact we are not dealing with an 
instrument revealing itself as “to be employed” in the move- 
ment of the free project which I am. Here the unrealizable 
appears as an a priori limit given to my situation (since I 
am such for the Other) and hence as an existent which does 
not wait for me to give it existence; but also it appears as 
able to exist only in and through the free project by which 
I shall assume it — the assumption evidently being identical 
with the synthetic organization of all the conduct aimed at 
realizing the unrealizable for me. At the same time since 
it is given in the capacity of an unrealizable, it is mani- 
fested as beyond all the attempts which I can make to realize 
it. The unrealizable is an a priori which requires my engage- 
ment in order to be, while depending only on this engage- 
ment and while placing itself at the start beyond any attempt 
to realize it. What then is this if not precisely an impera- 
tive? It is indeed to be interiorized (that is, it comes from 
the outside as does every fact) but the order, whatever it 
may be, is defined always as an exteriority recovered in 
inferiority. If an order is to be order — and not a flatus vocis 
or a pure factual given which one merely seeks to change — 
it is necessary that I reassume it with my freedom, that I 
make of it a structure of my free projects. But if the order 
is to be order and not a free movement toward my own ends, 
it must necessarily preserve at the very heart of my free choice 
its character as exteriority. It is the exteriority which remains 
exteriority even in and through the attempt on the part of 
the For-itself to interiorize it. This is precisely the defini- 
tion of the unrealizable to be realized; that is why it is given 
as an imperative. 

But we can go further in the description of this unrealiz- 
it is in fact my limit. But precisely because it is tny 
limit it can not exist as the limit of a given being but only 
as the limit of my freedom. This means that my freedom by 
freely choosing itself chooses its limits; or, if you prefer, the 
free choice of my ends (i.e., of what I am for myself) in- 
cludes the assumption of the limits of this choice, whatever 
they may be. Here again the choice is a choice of finitude 
as we indicated earlier, but whereas the chosen finitude is an 
inner finitude — i.e., the determination of freedom by itself — 



679 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 

the finitude assumed by the recovery of unrealizables is an 
external finitude. I choose to have a being at a distance, 
which limits all my choices and constitutes their reverse side; 
that is, I choose that my choice bo limited by something other 
than itself. If I should grow angry over it and attempt in 
every way to recover these limits, as we saw in the preceding 
section of this work, even the most energetic of these attempts 
at recovery must of necessity have its foundation in the 
free recovery as limits of the limits which one wishes to 
interiorize. Thus freedom is fully responsible and makes the 
unrealizable limits enter into the situation by choosing to be 
a freedom limited by the Other’s freedom. Consequently the 
external limits of the situation become a situation-limit — 
that is, they are incorporated in the interior of the situation 
with the characteristic “unrealizable” as “unrealizables to be 
realized.” As a chosen and fugitive reverse side of my choice, 
they become a meaning of my desperate effort to be although 
they are situated a priori beyond this effort exactly as death — 
another type of unrealizable which we do not have to con- 
sider for the moment — becomes a situation-limit on con- 
dition that it be taken as an event of life even though it 
points toward a world where my presence and my life are 
no longer realized — Le., toward what is beyond life. 

The fact that there is a beyond for life, a beyond which 
derives its meaning only through and in liiy life and which 
yet remains for me an unrealizable, and the fact that there 
is a freedom beyond my freedom, a situation beyond my 
situation and one for whiclv what I live as a situation is given 
as an objective form in the midst of the world: here are two 
types of situation-limit which have the paradoxical character 
of limiting my freedom on every side and yet not having 
any other meaning than that which my freedom confers 
on them. For class, for race, for the body, for the Other, 

for function, etc., there is a “being-free-for .” By it the 

For-itself projects itself toward one of its possibles which 
is always its ultimate possible, for the envisaged possibility is 
a possibility of seeing itself; that is, of being another 
than itself in order to see itself from outside. In one case 
as in the other there is a projection of self toward an “ulti- 
mate” which thereby interiorized becomes thematic out-of- 
reach meaning of hierarchized possibles. One can “be-in-order- 
t(>be-French,” “be-in-order-to-be-a-worker,” the son of a 
kmgcan “be-in-order-to-reign.” We are dealing here with 



680 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


limits and negating states of our being which we- have to 
assume in the sense in which, for example, the Zionist Jew 
resolutely assumes himself within his race — that is, assumes 
concretely and once and for all the permanent alienation 
of his being; in the same way the revolutionary worker, by 
his very revolutionary project assumes a “being-in-order-to- 
be-a-worker.” And we shall note as Heidegger did (although 
the expressions “authentic” and “unauthentic” which he 
employs are dubious and insincere because of their implicit 
moral content) that the attitude of refusal and of flight which 
remains always possible is despite itself the free assumption 
of what it is fleeing. Thus the bourgeois makes himself a 
bourgeois by denying that there are any classes, just as the 
worker makes himself a worker by asserting that classes 
exist and by realizing through his revolutionary activity 
his “being-in-a-class.” But these external limits of freedom, 
precisely because they are external and are interiorized only 
as unrealizables, will never be either a real obstacle for free- 
dom or a limit suffered. Freedom is total and infinite, which 
does not mean that it has no limits but that it never encoun- 
ters them. The only limits which freedom bumps up against 
at each moment are those which it imposes on itself and of 
which we have spoken in connection with the past, with the 
environment, and with techniques. 


E. My Death 

After death had appeared to us as pre-eminently non- 
human since it was what there was on the other side of 
the “wall,” we decided suddenly to consider it from a 
wholly different point of view — that is, as an event of 
human life. This change is easily explained: death is a 
boundary, and every boundary (whether it be final or initial) 
is a Janus bifrons. Whether it is thought of as adhering to 
the nothingness of being which limits the process considered 
or whether on the contrary it is revealed as adhesive to the 
series which it terminates, in either case it is a being which 
belongs to an existent process and which in a certain 
v^y constitutes the meaning of the process. Thus the final 
chord of a melody always looks on the one side toward 
silence— that is, toward the nothingness of sound which 
will follow the melody; in one sense it is made with the 


681 


BEING AND DOING; FREEDOM 

silence since the silence which will follow is already present 
in the resolved chord . as its meaning. But on the other side 
it adheres to this plenum of being which is the melody 
intended; without the chord this melody would remain in the 
air, arid this final indecision would flow back from note to 
note to confer on each of them the quality of being unfin- 
ished. 

Death has always been — ^rightly or wrongly is what we 
can not yet determine — considered as the final boundary of 
human life. As such it was natural that a philosophy which 
was primarily concerned to make precise the human position 
in relation to the non-human which surrounded it would 
first consider death as a door opening upon the nothingness 
of human-reality, and that this nothingness would be the 
absolute cessation of being or else existence in a non-human 
form. Thus we may say that there has been — in correlation 
with the great realist theories — a realistic conception of 
death such that death appeared as an immediate contact with 
the non-human. Thus death escaped man at the same time 
that it rounded him off with the non-human absolute. It was 
not possible, of course, for an idealist and humanistic; concep- 
tion of the real to tolerate the idea that man would encounter 
the non-human even as his limit. It would then have sufficed, 
in fact, to adopt the point of view of this limit in order to - 
illuminate man with non-human light.^^ idealist attempt 
to recover death was not originally the feat of philosophers 
but that of poets like Rilke or novelists like Malraux. It was 
sufficient to consider death as the final term belonging to the 
series. If the series thus recovers its terminus ad quern, then 
precisely because of this ad which indicates its interiority, ‘ 
death as the end of life is interiorized and humanized. Man 
can no longer encounter anything but the human; there is no 
longer any other side of life, and death is a human phenom-- 
-enon; it is the final phenomenon of life and is still life. As 
such it influences the entire life by a reverse flow. Life is 
limited by life; it becomes like the world of Einstein, “finite 
but unlimited.” Death becomes the meaning of life as the 
resolved chord is the meaning of the melody. There is noth- 
ing miraculous in this; it is one term in_the series under 
consideration, and, as one knows, each term of a series 
is always present in all the terms of the series. 

But death thus recovered does not remain simply human; it 

22 See, for example, the realistic Platonism of Morgan in Sparkenbrook. 



682 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

becomes mine. By being interiori 2 ed it is individualized. 
Death is no longer the great unknowable which limits the 
human; it is the phenomenon of my personal life which 
makes of this life a unique life — that is, a life which does 
not begin again, a life in which one never recovers his stroke. 
Hence I become responsible for my death as for my life. Not 
for the empirical and contingent phenomenon of my decease 
but for this character of finitude which causes my life like 
my death to be my life. It is in this sense that Rilke attempts 
to show that the end of each man resembles his life because 
all his individual life has been a preparation for this end. 
In this sense Malraux in Les Conquerants shows that 
European culture by giving to certain Asiatics the meaning 
of their death suddenly penetrates them with this despairing 
and intoxicating truth that “life is unique.” It was left to 
Heidegger to give a philosophical form to this humanization 
of death. In fact if the Dasein actually suffers nothing pre- 
cisely because it is a project and an anticipation, then it 
must be an anticipation and a project of its own death 
as the possibility of no longer realizing presence in the 
world. Thus death has become the peculiar possibility of the 
Dasein, the being of human-reality is defined as Sein zum 
Tode. Inasmuch as the Dasein determines its project toward - 
death, it realizes freedom-to-die and constitutes itself as a 
totality by its free choice of finitude. 

It appears at first that we can not but be attracted to such 
a theory: by interiorndng death, it serves our own ends; this 
apparent limit of our freedom by being interiorized is re- 
covered by freedom. Yet neither the advantage of these views 
nor the undeniable portion of truth which they include should 
mislead us. It is necessary to take the question up again from 
the beginning. 

It is certain that human-reality, by whom the quality of 
being a world comes to the real, can not encounter the non- 
human; the very concept of the non-human is man’s concept. 
Therefore even if in-itself death were a passage to an absolute 
non-human, we should stiU have to abandon any hope of con- 
sidering it as a window giving out upon that absolute. Death 
reveals to us only ourselves and that from a human point of 
view. Does this mean that death belongs a priori to human 
reality? 

What must be noted first is the absurd character of death. 
In this sense every attempt to consider it as a resolved chord 



683 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 

at the end of a melody must be sternly rejected. It has often 
been said that we are in the situation of a condemned man 
among other condemned men who is ignorant of the day of 
his execution but who sees each day that his fellow 
prisoners are being executed. This is not wholly exact. We 
ought rather to compare ourselves to a man condemned to 
death who is bravely preparing himself for the ultimate perial- 
ty, who is doing everything possible to make a good showing 
on the scaffold, and who meanwhile is carried off by a flu epi- 
demic. This is what Christian wisdom understands when it 
recommends preparing oneself for death as if it could come 
at any hour. Thus one hopes to recover it by metamorphosing 
it into an expected death. K the meaning of our life becomes 
the expectation of death, then when death occurs, it can only 
put its seal upon life. This is basically the most positive con- 
tent of Heidegger’s “resolute decision” (Entschlossenheit) . 

Unfortunately this advice is easier to give than to follow, 
not because of a natural weakness in human-reality or be- 
cause of an original project of unauthenticity, but because of 
death itself. One can, in fact, expect a particular death but 
not death. The sleight of hand introduced by -Heidegger is 
easy enough to detect. He begins by individualizing the death 
of each one of us, by pointing out to us that it is the death of 
a person, of an individual, the “only thing which nobody can 
do for me.” Then this incomparable individuality which he 
has conferred upon death in terms of the Dasein, he uses to 
individualize the Dasein itself; it is by projecting itself freely 
toward its final possibility that the Dasein will attain authen- 
tic existence and wrench itself away from everyday banality 
in order to attain the irreplaceable uniqueness of the person. 
But there is a circle here. How indeed can one prove that 
death has this individuality and the power of conferring it? 
Of course, if death is described as my death, I can await it; 
it is a possibility which is characterized and distinct. But is ' 
the death which will overtake me my death?. In the first 
place it is perfectly gratuitous to say that “to die is the only 
thmg which nobody can do for me.” Or rather there is here an 
evident bad faith in the reasoning; if one considers death as 
the ultimate subjective possibility, the event which concerns 
only the for-itself, then it is evident that nobody can die for 
me. But then it follows that none of my possibilities taken 

from^ this point of view — ^which is that of the cogito 

whether taken in authentic existence or unauthentic can be 



684 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


projected by anyone other than me. Nobody can love for me — 
if we mean by that to make vows which are my vows, to ex- 
perience the emotions (however commonplace they may be) 
which are my emotions. And the my here has nothing to do 
with a personality won by overcoming everyday banality 
(which would allow Heidegger to retort that it is very neces- 
sary that I be “free to die,” in order that k love which I ex- 
perience should be my love and not the love in me of the 
“they”); it refers simply to that selfness which Heidegger 
expressly recognizes in every Dasein — whether it exists in the 
authentic or unauthentic mode — ^when he decfares that 
“Dasein ist je meines.” Thus from this point of view the 
most commonplace love is, like death, irreplaceable and 
unique; nobody can love for me. 

On the other hand, if my acts in the world are consid- 
ered from the point of view of their function, their efficacy, 
and their result, it is certain that the Other can always 
do what I do. If it is a question of making this woman happy, 
of safeguarding her life or her freedom, of giving her the 
means of finding her salvation, or simply of realLziog a 
home with her, of “giving her” children, if that is what we 
call loving, then another will be able to love in my place, he 
will even be able to love for me. This is the actual meaning of 
those sacrifices recounted thousands of times in sentimental 
novels which show us the amorous hero longing for the hap- 
piness of the woman whom he loves and effacing himself be- 
fore his rival because the latter “will be able to love better 
than he.” Here the rival is specifically charged to love for, 
for to love is defined simply as “to make happy by the love 
which is borne to her,” And so it will be with all my con- 
duct In this case, however, my death also will fall into this 
category. If to die is to die in order to inspire, to bear witness, 
for the country, etc., then anybody at all can die in my place — 
as in the song in which lots are drawn to see who is to be 
eaten. In short there is no personalizing virtue which is pecu- 
liar to my death. Quite the contrary, it becomes my death 
only if I place myself already in the perspective of sub- 
jectivity; it is my subjectivity defined by the pre-reflective 
cogito which makes of my death a subjective irreplaceable, 
and not death which woidd give an irreplaceable selfness to 
my for-itself. In this case death can not be characterized; for 
It is death as my death, and consequently its essential struc- 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


685 


ture as death is not sufficient to make of it that personalized 
and qualified event which one can waft for. ^ , 

Furthermore death can not be awaited unless it is very pre- 
cisely designated as tny condemnation to death (the execution 
which will take place in eight days, the issue of my illness, 
which I know to be immanent and ruthless, etc.), for it is 
nothing but the revelation of the absurdity of every expecta- 
tion even though it be the expectation of death itself. To 
begin with, we must carefully distinguish between two mean- 
ings of the verb “expect” which are continually confused: to 
expect death is not to wait for death.^® We can “wait for” only 
a determined event which equally determined processes are in 
the act of realizing. I can wait for the arrival of the train from 
Chartres because I know that it has left the station of Char- 
tres and that each turn of the wheels brings it closer to the 
station at Paris. Of course the train can be late; an accident 
even can happen. But the fact remains that the process itself 
by which the entrance into the station will be realized is “un- 
der way”; and the phenomena which can delay or prevent this 
entrance into the station mean here simply that the process is 
only a relatively closed, relatively isolated system and that it 
is in fact immersed in a universe with a “fibrous structure,” 
as Meyerson put it Thus I can say that I am waiting for 
Pierre and that “I expect that his train is late.” But in the same 
way the possibility of my death means only that I am bio- 
logically only a relatively closed, relatively isolated system; it 
indicates only the fact that my body belongs to the totality of 
existents. It is of the same type as the probable delay of 
trains, not of the type of Pierre’s arrival. It stands with the 
unforeseen, unexpected impediment which we must always 
take into account even while it preserves its specific character 
as unexpected, the impediment which one can not wait for 
because it is itself .lost in the undetermined. Indeed even if we 
admit that the factors are strictly conditioned, which is not 
even proved and which requires therefore a metaphysical 
option, still their number is infinite and their implications in- 
finitely infinite; their ensemble does not constitute a system. 
At least from the point of view considered, the envisioned 
result — my death — can not be foreseen for any date, and con- 


=“Tr. s^tre here is distinguishing between the reflexive and non-refl. 
orm of the verb attendre. I am translating s^attendre as “to exnect” 



686 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

sequently it can not be waited for. Perhaps while I am peace- 
fully writing in this room, the state of the universe is such 
that my death has approached considerably closer; but per- 
haps, on the contrary, it has just been considerably removed. 
For example, if I am waiting for a mobilixation order, I can 
consider that my death is imminent — i.e,, that the chances of 
an imminent death are considerably increased; but it can 
happen that at the same moment an international conference 
is being held in secret and that it has discovered a way of 
prolonging the peace. 

Thus I can not say that the minute which is passing is bring- 
ing death closer to me. It is true that death is coming to me 
if I consider very broadly that my life is limited. But within 
these very elastic limits (I can die at the age of a hundred or 
at thirty-seven, tomorrow) I can not know whether this end is 
coming closer to me or being removed farther from me. This 
is because there is a considerable difference in quality between 
death at the limit of old age and sudden death which annihi- 
lates us at the prime of life or in youth. To wait for the for- 
mer is to accept the fact that life is a limited enterprise; it is 
one way among others of choosing finitude and electing our 
ends on the foundation of jSnitude. To wait for the second 
would be to wait with the idea that my life is an enterprise 
which is lacking. If only deaths from old age existed (or 
deaths by explicit condemnation), then I could wait for my 
death. But the unique quality of death is the fact that it can 
always before the end surprise those who wait for it at such - 
and such a date. And while death from old age can be con- - 
fused with the finitude of our choice and consequently can 
be lived as the resolved chord of our life (we are given a task 
and we are given time to accomplish it), sudden death, on 
the contrary, is such that it can in no way be waited for. 
Sudden death is undetermined and by definition can not be 
waited for at any date; it always, in fact, includes the possi- 
bility that we shall die in surprise before the awaited date 
and consequently that our waiting may be, qua waiting, a 
deception or that we shall survive beyond this date; in the 
latter case since we were only this waiting, we shall outlive 
ourselves. 

Moreover as the sudden death is qualitatively different 
from the other only to the extent that we live one or the other 
biologically (that is, from the point of view of the universe 
they differ in no way as to their causes and the factors which 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM - 687 

determine them) the indetermination of the one actually is 
reflected in the other. This means that 

death from old age only blindly or m bad faith. We have, m 
fact every chance of dying before we have, accomplished our 
S the other hand, of oufliving it. There is therefore 

a very slim chance that our death will be presented to us as 
that of Sophocles was, for example, m the manner of a re- 
solved chord. And if it is only chance which decides the char- 
acter of our death and therefore of our life, then even the 
death which most resembles the end of a melody can not be 
waited for as such; luck by determining it for me removes 
from it any character as an harmonious end. An end of a 
melody in order to confer its meaning on the melody must 
emanate from the melody itself. A death like that of Sophocles 
will therefore resemble a resolved chord but will not be one, 
just as the group of letters formed by the falling of alphabet 
blocks will perhaps resemble a word but will not be one. Thus 
this perpetual appearance of chance at the heart of my proj- 
ects can not be apprehended as my possibility but, on the 
contrary, as the nihilation of all my possibilities, a nihilation 
which itself is no longer a part of my possibilities. Thus death 
is not my possibility of no longer realizing a presence in the 
world but rather an always possible nihilation of my possibles 
which is outside my possibilities. 

This can be expressed in a slightly different way if we 
approach the problem from the consideration of meanings. 
Human reality is meaningful, as we know. This means that 
human reality makes known to itself what it is by means of 
that which is not, or if you prefer, that it is to come to itself. 
If therefore it is perpetually engaged in its own future, this 
compels us to say that it waits for the confirmation of this 
future. As future, in fact, that which is to come is pre-out- 
lined by a present which will be; one puts oneself in the 
hands of this present which alone, by virtue of being present, 
IS to be able to confirm or invalidate the pre-outlined mean- 
ing which I am. As this present will be itself a free recovery 

M ^ ^ future, we shall not be 

e to determine it but only to project it and wait for it. The 
meaning of my actual conduct is the reprimand which I wish 
offpnripH ^ particular person who has seriously 

»rba reprimand win 

whefterThe stammerings and 

ther the meaning of my present conduct wUl pot be trans- 



688 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


formed in the past? Freedom limits freedom; the past derives 
its meaning from the present. This, as we have shown, ex- 
plains the paradox that our actual conduct is both totally 
translucent (the pre-reflective cogito) and at the same time 
totally hidden by a free determination which we must wait for. 
The adolescent is perfectly conscious of the mystic sense of his 
conduct, and at the same time he must entrust himself to all 
his future in order to determine whether he is in the process 
of “passing through a crisis of puberty” or of engaging him- 
self in earnest in the way of devotion. 

Thus our further freedom, inasmuch as it is not our 
actual possibility but the foundation of possibilities which we 
are not yet, constitutes as a sort of opacity in full translucency 
something like what Barr^s called “the mystery in broad day- 
light” Hence this necessity for us to wait for ourselves. Our 
life is only a long wmting: first a waiting for the realization 
of our ends (to be engaged in an undertaking is to wait for 
its outcome) and especially a waiting for ourselves (even if 
This undertaking is realized, even if I am able to make myself 
loved, to obtain this distinction, this favor, it remains for me 
to determine the place, the meaning, and the value of this very 
enterprise in my life) . This does not stem from a contingent 
lack in human “nature,” from a nervousness which would pre- 
vent us from limiting ourselves to the present and which 
could be corrected by practice, but rather from the very nature 
of the for-itself which “is” to the extent that it temporalizes 
itself. Thus it is necessary to consider our life as being made 
up not only of waitings but of waitings which themselves 
wait for waitings. There we have the very structure of self- 
ness: to be oneself is to come to oneself. These waitings 
evidently all include a reference to a final term which would 
be waited for without waiting for anything more. A repose 
which would be being and no longer a waiting for being. The 
whole series is suspended from this final term which on 
principle is never given and which is the value of our being— 
that is, evidently, a plenitude of the type “in-itself-for-it- 
self.” By means of this final term the recovery of our past 
would be made once and for all. We should know for always 
whether a particular youthful experience had been fruitful or 
ill-stored, whether a particular crisis of puberty was a caprice 
or a real pre-formation of my later engagements; the curve of 
our life would be fixed forever. In short, the account would be 
closed. Christians have tried to take death as this final term. 



689 


BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


The Reverend Father Boisselot in a private conversation with 
me gave me to understand that the “Last Judgment was pre- 
cisely this closing of the account which renders one unable 
any longer to recover his stroke and which makes one finally 

be what one has been — irremediably. ^ 

But there is an error here analogous to that which we 
pointed out earlier in connection with Leibniz although it is ^ 
put at the other end of existence. For Leibniz we are free 
since our acts derive from our essence. Yet the single fact that 
our essence has not been chosen by us shows that all this free- 
dom in particulars actually covers over a total slavery. God 
chose Adam’s essence. Conversely if it is the closing of the 
account which gives our life its meaning and its value, then 
it is of little importance that all the acts of which the web of 
our life is made have been free; the very meaning of them 
escapes us if we do not ourselves choose the moment at which 
the account will be closed. This has been clearly perceived by 
the free-thinking author of an anecdote echoed in the work 
of Diderot. Two brothers appeared at the divine tribunal on 
the Day of Judgment. The first said to God, “Why did you 
make me die so young?” And God said, “In order to save you. 

If you had lived longer, you would have committed a crime 
as your brother did.” Then the brother in turn asked, “Why 
did you make me die so old?” If death is not the free deter- 
mination of our • being, it can not complete our life. If 
one minute more or less may perhaps change everything and if 
this minute is added to or removed from my account, then 
even admitting that I am free to use my life, the meaning of 
my life escapes me. Now the Christian death comes from 
God. He chooses our hour, and in a general way 1 know 
clearly that even if it is I who by temporalizing myself cause 
there to be minutes and hours in general, still the minute of 

my death is not fixed by me; the sequences of the universe de- 
termine it. 


If this is the case, we can no longer even say that death 
confers a meaning on life from the outside; a meaning can 
come only from subjectivity. Since death does not appear 
on the foundation of our freedom, it can only remove all 
meanms from life. If I am a waiting for waitings for wait- 
ng^ and if suddenly the object of my final waiting and the 
ne who awaits it are suppressed, the waiting takes on 
ctrospectively the character of absurdity. For exSiNe 
young man has lived for thirty years in the expectadon 



690 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

of becoming a great writer, but this waiting itself is not 
enough; it becomes a vain and senseless obstinacy or a pro- 
found comprehension of his value according to the books 
which he writes. His first book has appeared, but by itself 
what does it mean? It is the book of a beginner. Let us 
admit that it is good; still it gets its meaning through the 
future. If it is unique, it is at once inauguration and testa- 
ment. He has only one book to write; he is limited and cut 
off by his work; he will not be “a great writer.” If the novel 
is one in a mediocre series, it is an “accident.” If it is fol- 
lowed by other better books, it can classify its author in the 
first rank. But exactly at this point death strikes the author— 
at the very moment when he was anxiously testing himself 
to find out “whether he had the stuff” to write another 
work, at the moment when he was stdl expecting to become 
a great writer. This is enough to cause everything to fall 
into the undetermined: I can not say that the dead writer is 
the author of a single book (in the sense that he would 
have had only one book to write) nor that he would have 
written several (since in fact only one has appeared) . I can say 
nothing. Suppose that Balzac had died before Les Chouans; 
he would remain the author of some execrable novels of 
intrigue. But suddenly the very expectation which this 
young man was, this expectation of being a great man, 
loses any kind of meaning; it is neither an obstinate and 
egotistic^ blindness nor the true sense of his own value 
since nothing shall ever decide it It would be useless indeed to 
try to decide it by considering the sacrifices which he made 
to his art, the obscure and hard,' life which he Was willing 
to lead; just as many mediocre figures have had the strength 
to make comparable sacrifices. On the contrary, the final 
value of this conduct remains forever in suspense; or if you 
prefer, the ensemble (particular kinds of conduct, expectations, 
values) falls suddenly into the absurd. Thus death is never 
that which gives life its meanings; it is, on the contrary, that 
which on principle removes all meaning from life. If we 
must die, then our life has rio meaning because its problems 
receive no solution and because the very meaning of the 
problems remains undetermined. 

It would be in vain for us to resort to suicide in order to 
escape this necessity. Suicide can not be considered as an 
end of life for which I should be the unique foundation. 
Since it , is an act of my Iffe, indeed, it itself requires a 



^ nolNG: FREEDOM 

being and DOIN 

meaning «Wch fy f JStd &ture. ’Thu^/i 

last act of niy > ^ escape death, or if « -mjjj 

totally undetermined. If 1 cowardice? WUl 

shall I not judge later solutions were possible? 

the outcome not show me A ^ ^ jny own projects, *ey 

But since these soluuons can be only . ^^tch 

SU‘’C?&to\esubmerg^^^^^^^^ Bae 

These remarks, it wJl b . - ’ j,.jaiy from the consider- 
coiiderationofdeathbut.onthecomryy. i ^ 
Ton of life; is because ta «se«^ 
whose being being is m qjsuo , there is no 

being which always lays fi^"” ‘ ; £or-itself. AVhat then 

placi for death i».*" to toth if it is not the 

could be the meanmg of a wai § ^ would reduce 

waiting for an 

all waiting to the absurd, self.destructive, for it would 

A waiting for denth,;"°-"d be , p,rtic- 

be the negation of all ,Lj martyrdom, heroism) 

ular death is comprehensible ^uicid^ mnr^ undetermined 

but n^. the proiect toward my dem^^^^^ 

possibdity of no long to 8 P -^1 projects. 

r'bemy' peculiar possibiiity, it can no. 

even be one of as it can be revealed.to me, is 

nor'^Snra?:^’ po“iS:“ihaation of my possibles, 
a nihilation outside my possibilities. It is ““i ° ^ gjj”jbe 
ect which destroys aU projects and which , 

impossible destruction of my expectaUons. It is ^so the 
triumph of the point of view of the Other over the pomt 
S view which lam toward myself This is “ss ^ 
Malraux means when in I’Espoir he says of death that it 
“transforms life into destiny.” Death, m fact, is only on its 
negative side the nihilation of my possibilities, since indeed 
I am my possibilities only through the nihilaUon of bemg- 
in-itself which I have to be, death as the nAdation of a 
nihilation is a positing of my being as in-itself m the sense 
in which for Hegel the negation of a negation is an affirma- 
tion. So long as the for-itself is "m life” it surpasses its past 
toward its future, and the past is that which ,the for-itself 
- has to be. When the for-itself “ceases to live, this past 
is not thereby abolished. The disappearance of the nihilating 


692 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

being does not touch that part of its being which is of the 
type of the in-itself; it is engulfed in the in-itself. My whole 
life is. This means not that it is an harmonious totality but 
that it has ceased to be its own suspense and that it can no 
longer change itself by the simple consciousness which it 
has of itself. Quite the contrary, the meaning of any phenom- 
enon whatsoever in that life is henceforth fixed not by itself 
but by this open totality which is the arrested life. This 
meaning in the primary and fundamental sense is an absence 
of meaning, as we have seen. But in a secondary and derived 
sense thousands of shimmering, iridescent relative meanmgs 
can come into play upon this fundamental absurdity of a 
“dead” life. 

For example, whatever may have been its ultimate vanity, 
the fact remains that Sophocles’ life was happy, that Balzac’s 
life was prodigiously industrious, etc. Naturally these general 
qualifications can be made tighter; we can risk a descrip- 
tion, an analysis, along with a narration of this life. We 
shall obtain more distinct characteristics; for example, we shall 
be able to speak of a particular dead woman in the same way 
as Mauriac speaks of one of his heroines when he says that 
she lived in “prudent desperation.” We shall be able to 
grasp the meaning of Pascal’s “soul” (/.e., of his inward 
“life”) as “magnificent and bitter” as Nietzsche described it. 
We can go on to qualify a particular episode as “cowardly” or 
“tactless” without, however, ever losing sight of the fact that 
only the contingent arrest pf this “being-in-perpetual-suspense” 
which is the living for-itself allows us on the foimdation of a 
radical absurdity to confer a relative meaning on the episode 
considered, and that this meaning is an essentially provisory 
meaning, the provisory quality of which has accidentally passed 
into the definitive. But these various explanations of the mean- 
ing of Pierre’s life — ^when it was Pierre himself who effected 
them in his own life — ^resulted in changing the meaning and 
the orientation; for every description of one’s own life when it 
is attempted by the for-itself is a project of the self beyond this 
life. And as the altering project is by the same token bound to 
life which it alters, it is Pierre’s own life which metamorphoses 
its meaning by continually temporalizing itself. Now that 
his life is dead, only the memory of the Other can prevent 
Pierre’s life from shriveling up in its plenitude in-itself 
by. cutting all its moorings-with the present 

The unique characteristic of a dead life is that it is a life 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


693 


of which the Other makes himself the guardian. This does 
not mean simply that the Other preserves the life of the 
“deceased” by effecting an explicit, cognitive reconstruction 
of it. Quite the contrary, such a reconstruction is only one or 
the possible attitudes of the Other in relation to the dead 
life; consequently the character of a “reconstructed life 
(in the midst of the family through the memories ^ of 
relatives, in the historic environment) is a particular destiny 
which is going to mark some lives to the exclusion of others. 
The necessary result is that the opposite quality-— “a life fall- 
en into oblivion” — also represents a specific destiny capable 
of description, one which comes to certain lives again^ in 
terms of the Other. To be forgotten is to be made the object 
of an attitude of another, and of an implicit decision on the 
part of the Other. To be forgotten is, in fact, to be resolutely 
apprehended forever as one element dissolved into a mass 
(the “great feudal lords of the thirteenth century,” the 
“bourgeois Whigs” of the eighteenth, the “Soviet officials,” 
etc.)\ it is in no way to be annihilated, but it is to lose 
one’s personal existence in order to be constituted with others 
in a collective existence. 

This shows us clearly what we hoped to prove: it is that 
the Other can not be first without any contact with the dead 
so as to decide subsequently (or 'so that circumstances may 
decide) that he will have this or that relation with certain 
particular dead (those whom he has known while they 
were ^ve, the “famous dead,” etc.). In reality the relation 
with the dead — with all the dead — is an essential structure 
of the fundamental relation which we have called “being-for- 
others.” its upsurge into being, the for-itself must assume a 
position in relation to the dead; his initial project organizes 
them in large. anonymous masses or as distinct individualities; 
And for these collective masses as for these, individualities 
he determines their removal or their absolute proximity 
he unfolds temporal distances between them and himself 
by temporalizing himself just as he unfolds spatial distances 
m terms of his surroundings. While making himself 
^own to himself through his end he decides the pecufiar 
importance of the extinct coUectivities or individualities 
, A parhcular group which will be strictly anonymous aS 
amoyhous for Pierre wiU be specific and structured for me* 
another, purely uniform for me, will for Jean effect the 

ppearance of its component individuals. Byzantium, Rome 



694 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

Athens, the second Crusade, the Convention, as many 
immense necropoleis as I can see from near or far, from 
casual observation or careful scrutiny according to the posi- 
tion which I take which I “am.” It is not impossible (pro- 
vided one understands this properly) to define a “person” 
by his dead — i.e., by the areas of individualization or of 
collectivization which he has determined in the necropolis, 
by the roads and pathways which he has traced, by the infor- 
mation which he has decided to get for himself, by the 
“roots” which he has put down there. 

Of course the dead choose us, but it is necessary first that 
we have chosen them. We find here again the original re- 
lation which binds facticity to freedom: we choose our own- 
attitude toward the dead, but it is not possible for us not to 
choose an attitude. Indifference with respect to the dead is a 
perfectly possible attitude (examples of it will be found among 
the heimatlos, among certain revolutionaries, or among in- 
dividualists). But this indifference — which consists of mak- 
ing the dead “die again” — is one conduct among others with 
respect to them. Thus by its very facticity, the for-itself ” is 
thrown into, full “responsibility” with respect to the dead; 
it is obliged to decide freely the fate of the dead. In partic- 
ular, when it is a question of the dead who surround us, 
it is not possible for us not to decide: — explicitly or implic- 
itly — the fate of their enterprises; this is obvious when it is 
a question of the son who continues his father’s business 
or the disciple who continues the school and the teachings 
of his master. But although the bond is less clearly visible 
in a good number of circumstances, it is there also in every 
case in which the dead and the living belong to the same 
historical and concrete collectivity. It is I, it is the men 
of my generation who decide the meaning of the efforts and 
the enterprises of the preceding generation whether we 
resume and continue their social and political attempts, 
or whether we realize a decisive rupture and throw the dead 
back into inefficacy. As we have seen, it is the America of 
1917 which decides the value and the meaning of the deeds 
of Lafayette. 

Thus from this point of view we can see clearly the dif- 
ference between life and death: life decides its own mean- 
ing because it is always in suspense; it possesses essentially a 
power of self-criticism and self-metamorphosis which cause 
rt to define itself as a “not-yet” or, if you like, makes it be as 



695 


BEING AND DOINGr FREEDOM 

the changing of what it is. The dead Me does not 
cease to change, and yet it is all done. This means that for it 
the chips are down and that it will henceforth undergo its 
changes without being in any way responsible for them. For 
this life it is not a question only of an arbitrary and definitive 
totalization. In addition there is a radical transformation: noth- 
ing more can happen to it inwardlyj it is entirely closed, notli- 
ing more can be made to enter there; but its meaning does not 
cease to be modified from the outside. Until the death of this 
apostle of peace the meaning of his enterprises (as folly or ^ 
a profound sense of the truth of things, as successful or a fail- 
ure) was in his own hands. “So long as I am here, there 
will not be any war.” But to the extent that this meaning sur- 
passes the limits of a simple individuality, to the extent that 
the person makes himself known to himself through an objec- 
tive situation to be realized (the peace in Europe) , death repre- 
sents a total dispossession; it is the Other who dispossesses 
the Apostle of peace of the very meaning of his efforts and 
therefore of his being, for the Other despite himself and by 
his very upsurge undertakes to transform into failure or suc- 
cess, into folly or an intuition of genius the very enterprise by 
which the person made himself known to himself and which 
he was in his being. 

Thus the very existence of death alienates us wholly in 
our own life to the advantage of the Other. To be dead is to 
be a prey for the living. This means therefore that the one 
who tries to grasp the meaning of his future death must dis- 
cover himself as the future prey of others. We have here there- 
fore a case of alienation which we did not consider in the 
section of this work which we devoted to the For-others. The 
alienations which we studied there, in fact, were those which 
we could nihUate by transforming the Other into a transcen- 
dence-transcended, just as we could nihil ate our outside by 
the absolute and subjective positing of our freedom. So long 
as I live I can escape what I am. for the Other by revealing 
to myself by my freely posited ends that I am nothing and 
that I make myself be what I am; so long as I live, I can give 
the he to what others discover in me, by projecting myself 
^eady toward other ends and in every instance by revealing 
toat my dimension of being-for-myself is incommensurable 
with my dimension of being-for-others. Thus ceaselessly I 




696 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

longs to neither the one nor the other of these modes of 
being. But the fact of death without being precisely allied to 
either of the adversaries in this same combat gives the &al 
victory to the point of view of the Other by transferring the 
combat and the prize to another level — that is, by suddenly 
suppressing one of the combatants. In this sense to die is to be 
condemned no matter what ephemeral victory one has won 
over the Other; even if one has made use of the Other to 
“sculpture one’s own statue,” to die is to exist' only through 
the Other, and to owe to him one’s meaning and the very 
meaning of one’s victory. 

If we share the realist views which we presented in Part 
Three, we must recognize that my existence after death is not 
the simple spectral survival “in the Other’s consciousness” of 
simple representations (images, memories, etc.) concerning 
me. My being-for-others is a real being. If it remains in the 
hands of the Other like a coat which I leave to him after my 
disappearance, this is by virtue of a real dimension of my being 
— a dimension which has become my unique dimension — and 
not in the form of an unsubstantial specter. Richelieu, Louis 
XV, my grandfather are by no means the simple sum of my 
memories, nor even the sum of the memories or the pieces of 
knowledge of all those who have heard of them; they are ob- 
jective and opaque beings which are reduced to the single 
dimension of exteriority. In this capacity they will pursue 
their history in the human world, but. they will never be 
more than transcendences-transcended in the midst of the 
world. Thus not only does death disarm my waiting by defin- 
itively removing the waiting and by abandoning in indeter- 
mination the realization of the ends which make known to me 
what I am — but again it confers a meaning from the outside 
on everything which I live in subjectivity. Death reapprehends 
all this subjective which while it “lived” defended itself 
against exteriorization, and death deprives it of all, subjective 
meaning in order to hand it over to any objective meaning 
which the Other is pleased to give to it. Nevertheless it 
should be noted that this “destiny” thus conferred on my 
life remains also in suspense, in reprieve. The reply to the 
question, “What will be the definitive historical destiny of 
Robespierre?” depends on the reply to this preliminary ques- 
tion: “Does history have a meaning?” That is, “Is history 
completed or only terminated?" This question is not resolved. 
Perhaps it is insolvable since all answers which can be made 



BEING AND DOING; FREEDOM 697 

to it (including the answer of idealism: “The history of 
Egypt is the history of Egyptology”) are themselves his- 
torical. 

Thus by admitting that my death can be revealed m my 
life, we see that it can not be a pure arresting of my subjectiy- 
ity; for such an arresting, since it is an inner event of 
subjectivity, could finally be concerned only with the subjec- 
tivity. If it is true that dogmatic realism was wrong in view- 
ing death as the state of death — i.e., as a transcendent to life 
—the" fact remains that death such that I can discover it as 
mine necessarily engages something other than myself. In fact 
in so far as it is the always possible nihilation of my possibles, 
it is outside my possibilities and therefore I can not wait for 
it; that is, I can not thrust myself toward it as toward one of 
my possibilities. Death can not therefore belong to the on- 
tological structure of the for-itself. In so far as it is the 
triumph of the Other over me, it refers to a fact, fundamental 
to be sure, but totally contingent as we have seen, a fact which 
is the Other’s existence. We should not know this death if the 
Other did not exist; it could not be revealed to us, nor could 
it be constituted as the metamorphosis of our being into a 
destiny; it would be in fact the simultaneous disappearance of 
the for-itself and of the world, of the subjective, and of the 
objective, of the meaningful and of all meanings. If death can 
to a certain extent be revealed to us as the metamorphosis of 
these particular meanings which are my meanings, it is owing 
to the fact of the existence of a meaningful Other which 
guarantees the location of meanings and of signs. It is be- 
cause of the Other that my death is the fact that as a sub- 
jectivity I fall out of the world and it is not the annihilation 
of both consciousness and the world. There is then an undeni- 
able and fundamental character of fact — i.e., a radical contin- 
gency — ^in death as in the Other’s existence. This contingency 
at once puts death out of reach of all ontological conjectures. 
And to contemplate my life by considering it in terms of 
death would be to contemplate my subjectivity by adopting 
with regard to it the Other’s point of view. We have seen 
that this is not possible. 

Thus we must conclude in opposition to Heidegger that 
death, far from being my peculiar possibility, is a contingent 
fact which as such on principle escapes me and originally be- 
longs to my facticity. I can neither discover my death nor wait 
for it nor adopt an attitude toward it, for it is that which is 



698 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

revealed as undiscoverable, that which disarms all waiting, 
that which slips into all attitudes (and particularly into those 
which are assumed with respect to death) so as to transform 
them into externalized and fixed conducts whose meaning is 
forever entrusted to others and not to ourselves. Death is a 
pure fact as is birth; it comes to us from outside and it trans- 
forms us into the outside. At bottom it is in no way distin- 
guished from birth, and it is the identity of birth and death 
that we call facticity. 

Does this mean that death marks the limits of our free- 
dom? In renouncing Heidegger’s being-unto-death, have we 
abandoned forever the possibility of freely giving to our being 
a meaning for which we are responsible? 

Quite the contrary. As it seems to us, death by being 
revealed to us as it really is frees us wholly from its so-called 
constraint. This will be clearer if we but reflect on the matter. 

First, however, it will be well to separate radically the 
two usually combined ideas of death and finitude. Ordinarily 
the belief seems to be that it is' death which constitutes our 
finitude and which reveals it to us. From this combination it 
results that death takes on the shape of an ontological necessi- 
ty and that finitude, on the other hand, borrows from death 
its contingent character. Heidegger in particular seems to 
have based his whole theory of Sein-zum-Tode on the strict 
identification of death and finitude. In the same way Mal- 
raux, when he tells us that death reveals to us the uniqueness 
of life, seems to hold that it is just because we die that we 
are powerless to recover our stroke and are therefore finite. 
But if we consider the matter a little more closely, we detect 
their error: death is a contingent fact which belongs to factic- 
ity; finitude is an ontological structure of the for-itself which 
determines freedom and exists only in and through the 
free project of the end which makes my being known to 
me. In other words human reality would remain finite even 
if it were immortal, because it makes itself finite by choosing 
itself as human. To be finite,- in fact, is to choose oneself — 
that is, to make known to oneself what one is by projecting 
oneself toward one possible to the exclusion of others. The 
very act of freedom is therefore the assumption and creation 
of finitude. If I make myself, I make myself finite and hence 
my life is unique. Consequently even if I were immortal, it 
would be forbidden me to “recover my stroke”; it is the irre- 
versibility of temporality which forbids me, and this irreversi- 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


699 


bility is nothing but the peculiar character of a freedom which 
temporalizes itself. Of course if I am immortal and have had 
to reject the possible B in order to realize the possible A, the 
opportunity may be offered me later to realize the refused pos- 
sible. But by the very fact that this opportunity will be pre- 
sented after the refused opportunity, it will not be the, same, 
and consequently I shall for all eternity have made myself 
finite by irremediably rejecting the first opportunity. From this 
point of view, the immortal man like the mortal is born several 
and makes himself one. Even if one is temporally indefi- 
nite— /.e., without limits— one’s “life” will be nevertheless 
finite in its very being because it makes itself unique. Death 
has nothing to do with this. Death occurs “within time,” and 
human-reality by revealing to itself its unique fimtude does 


not thereby discover its mortality. 

Thus death is in no way an ontological structure of my 
being, at least not in so far as my being is for itself; it is the 
‘Other who is mortal in his being. There is no place for death 
in being-for-itself; it can neither wait for death nor realize it 
nor project itself toward it; death is in no way the foundation 
of the finitude of the for-itself. In a general way death can 
neither be founded from within like the project of original 
freedom, nor can it be received from the outside as a quality 
by the for-itself. What then is death? Nothing but a certain 
aspect of facticity and of being-for-others — i.e., no thin g other 
than the given. It is absurd that we are born; it is absurd that 
we die. On the other hand, this absurdity is presented as the 
permanent alienation of my being-possibility which is no 
longer my possibility but that of the Other. It is therefore an 
external and factual limit of my subjectivity! 

But do we not recognize at t^ point the description which 
we attempted in the preceding section? This factual limit 
which on the one hand we must affirm since nothing pene- 
trates us from outside and since in one sense it is very 
necessary that we experience death if we are to be able 
even to name it, this factual limit which, on the other hand 
is never encountered by the for-itself since it does not enter 
mto the for-itself save as the indefinite permanence of its beine- 
for-others — what is this limit if not precisely one of the un~ 
^ ^ ^ synthetic aspect for our reverse 


side. Mortal represents the present being which I am for the 
uther; dead represents the future meaning of my actual for 
Itaelf for the Other. We are dealmg therefore S a plrm^ 



700 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

nent limit of my projects; and as such this limit is to be 
assumed. It is therefore an exteriority which remains exteri- 
ority even in and through the attempt of the for-itself to 
realize it. It is what we defined above as the unrealizable to be 
realized. There is basically no difference between the choice by 
which freedom assumes its death as the inapprehensible and 
inconceivable limit of its subjectivity and that by which It 
chooses to be a freedom limited by the fact of the Other's 
freedom. Thus death is not my possibility in the sense pre- 
viously defined; it is a situation-limit as the chosen and fugi- 
tive reverse side of my choice. It is not my possible in the 
sense that it would be my own end which would make known 
to me my being. But due to the fact that it is an unavoidable 
necessity of existing elsewhere as an outside and an in-itself, it 
is interiorized as “ultimate”; that is, as a thematic meaning of 
the hierarchical possibles, a meaning out of reach. 

Thus death haunts me at the very heart of each of my 
projects as their inevitable reverse side. But precisely because 
this “reverse” is to be assumed not as my possibility but as 
the possibility that there are for me no longer any possibilities, 
it does not penetrate me. The freedom which is my freedom 
remains total and infinite. Death is not an obstacle to my proj- 
ects; it is only a destiny of these projects elsewhere. And this 
is not because death does not limit my freedom but because 
freedom never encounters this limit. I am not “free to die,” 
but I am a free mortal. Since death escapes my projects be- 
cause it is unrealizable, I myself escape death in my very proj- 
ect. Since death is always beyond my subjectivity, there is 
no place for it in my subjectivity. This subjectivity does not 
affirm itself against death but independently of it although 
this affirmation is immediately alienated. Therefore we can 
neither think of death nor wait for it nor arm ourselves 
against it; but also our projects as projects are independent 
of death — not because of our blindness, as the Christian says, 
but on principle. And although there are innumerable 
possible attitudes with which we may confront this unrealiz- 
able which “is thrown into the bargain” to be realized, there is 
no place for classifying these attitudes as authentic or unau- 
thentic since our death is always thrown into the bargain. 

These various descriptions relating to my place, my 
past, my environment, my death, and my fellowman do not 
claim to be exhaustive or even detailed. Their aim is sim- 
ply to grant us a clearer conception of the “situation.” 



,BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 701 

Thanks to these descriptions, it is going to be possible for ns 
more preckely this “being-m-situaUon” which 
characterizes the For-itself in so far as it is responsible 
for its manner of being without being the foundation of its 

(f) I am an existent in the midst of other existents. 
But I can not “realize” this existence in the midst of others; 
I can not apprehend as objects the existents which surround me 
nor apprehend myself as a surrounded existence nor even 
give a meaning to this notion of “in the midst of” except by 
choosing myself — ^not in my being but in my manner of 
being. Ihe choice of this end is the choice of what is not-^yetz 
existing. My position in the midst of the world is defined by 
the.relation between the instrumental utility or adversity in the 
realities which surround me and my own facticity; that is, 
the discovery of the dangers which I risk in the world, of 
the obstacles which I can encounter there, the aid which can 
be offered me, all in the light of a radical nihilation of my- 
self and of a radical, internal negation of the in-itself and 
all effected from the point of view of a freely posited end. 
This is what we mean by the situatior}. 

(2) The situation exists only in correlation with the sur- 
passing of the given toward an end. It is the way in which' the 
given which I am and the given which I am not are revealed 
to the For-itself which I am in the mode of not-being it. 
When we speak of situation therefore we are speaking of a 
“position apprehended by the For-itself which is in situation.” 
It is impossible to consider a situation from the outside; it is 
fixed in a form in itself. Consequently the situation can not 
be called either objective or subjective although the partial 
structures of this situation (the cup which I use, the table 
on which I lean, etc.) can and must be strictly objective. 

The situation can not be subjective, for it is neither' the 
sum nor the unity of the impressions which things make on 
us. It is the things themselves and myself among things; for 
my upsurge into the world as the pure nihilation of beins 
hM no other result but to cause there to be things, and it adds 
not/ung. In this aspect the situation betrays my facticitv- that 

-cti 

-SJalnfdteT ^ 

But neither can the situation be objective in 
that It would be a pure given which the subject woSd estab! 



702 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

lish without being in any way engaged in the system thus 
constituted. In fact the situation by the very meaning of the 
given (a meaning without which there would not even be 
any given) reflects to the for-ilself its freedom. If the sit- 
uation is neither subjective nor objective, this is because it 
does not constitute a knowledge nor even an affective com- 
prehension of the state of the world by a subject The situation 
is a relation of being between a for-itself and the in-itself 
which the for-itself nihilates. The situation is the whole 
subject (he is nothing but his situation) and it is also the 
whole “thing” (there is never anything more than things). 
The situation is the subject illuminating things by his very 
surpassing, if you like; it is things referring to the subject 
his own image. It is the total facticity, the absolute contingency, 
of the world, of my birth, of my place, of my past, of my 
environment, of the fact of my fellowman — and it is my 
freedom without limits as that which causes there to be 
for me a facticity. It is this dusty, ascending road, this burn- 
ing thirst which I have, the refusal of these people to give 
me an 5 rthing to drink because I do not have any money or 
because I am not of their country or of their race; it is my 
abandonment in the midst of these hostile populations along 
with this fatigue in my body which will perhaps prevent me 
from reaching the goal which I had set for myself. But also 
it is precisely this goal, not in so far as I clearly and explicitly 
formulate it but in so far as it is there everywhere around me 
as that which unifies and explains all these facts, that which 
organizes them in a totality capable of description instead 
of making of them a disordered nightmare. 

(3) If the for-itself is nothing other than its situation, then 
it follows that being-in-situation defines human reality by 
accounting both for its being-there and for its being-beyond. 
Human reality is indeed the being which is always be- 
yond its being-there. And the situation is the organized 
totality of the being-there, interpreted and lived in and through 
being-beyond. Therefore there is no privileged situation. 
We mean by this that there is no situation in which the 
given^ would crush beneath its weight the freedom which 
constitutes it as such — and that conversely there is no situation 
in which the for-itself would be more free than in others. 
This must not be understood in the sense of that “inward 
freedom” of Bergson’s which Politzer ridiculed in La fin 
d’une parade philosophique (The End of a Philosophical 



BEING' AND DOING: FREEDOM 

FcrMe) and which simply amounted to 
Lve the independence of *e imer Me “ 

chains. When we declare that the slave in ^^ns-is as tree 
as his master, we do not mean to speak of a freedom which 
would remain undetermined. The -slave in chains is free to 
break them: this means that the very meaning of his chains 
wUl appear to him in the light of the end which he will 
have chosen: to remain a slave or to risk the worst in order 
to get rid of his slavery. Of course the slave will not be able 
to obtain the wealth and the standard of living of his master; 
but these are not the objects of his projects; he' can only 
dream of the possession of these treasures, _ 'nie slave’s 
facticity is such that the world appears to him with another 
countenance and that he has to posit and to resolve different 
problems; in particular it is necessary fundamentally to choose 
himself on the ground of slavery and thereby to give a 
meaning to this obscure constraint. For example, if he 
chooses revolt, then slavery, far from being at the start an 
obstacle to this revolt, takes on its meaning and its coefficient 
of adversity only through the revolt. To be exact, just because 
the life of the slave who revolts and dies in the course of this ' 
revolt is a free life, just because the situation illuminated by a 
free project is full and concrete, just because the urgent and 
principal problem of this life is “Shall I attain my goal?” — 
just because of all this, the situation of the slave can not be 
compared with that of the master. Each of them in fact 
takes on its meaning only for the for-itself in situation and 
in terms of the free choice of its ends. A comparison could 
be made only by a third person and consequently it couldl 
take place only between two objective forms in the midst of 
the world; moreover it could be established only in the 
light of a project freely chosen by this third person. There 
is no absolute point of view which one can adopt so as to 
compare different situations; each person realizes only one 
situation— Aw own. 

^ ( 4 ) Since the situation is illumined by ends which are 
themselves projected only in terms of the being-there 
which they illuminate, it is presented as eminently concrete 
Ut course it contains and sustmns abstract and universal 
structures, but it must be understood as the i 00^^? 

which the world turns toward us as ourTiQu^anH 
personal chance. We may recall here a fable of Kafka’s- A 
rchant comes to plead his case at the castle where a for- 


704 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


bidding guard bars the entrance. The merchant does not dare 
to go further; he waits and dies still waiting. At the hour of 
death he asks the guardian, “How does it happen that I 
was the only one waiting?” And the guardian replies, “This 
gate was made only for you.” Such is precisely the case with 
the for-itself if we may add in addition that each man makes 
for himself his own gate. The concreteness of the situation 
is expressed particularly by the fact that the for-itself never 
aims at ends which are fundamentally abstract and universaL 
Of course we shall see in the next chapter that the profound 
meaning of the choice is universal and that consequently the 
for-itself causes a human-reality to exist as a species. Again 
it is necessary to disengage the meaning which is implicit, 
and it is for this that we shall use existential psychoanalysis. 
Once disengaged the terminal and initial meaning of the 
for-itself wiU appear as an Vnselbstdndig which in order 
to manifest itself needs a particular kind of concretion.^* 
But the end of the for-itself as it is lived and pursued in the 
project by which the for-itself surpasses and founds the 
real is revealed in its concreteness to the for-itself as a partic- 
ular change in the situation which it lives (e.g., to break its 
chains, to be King of the Franks, to liberate Poland, to fight 
for the proletariat). At first the for-itself will not project 
fighting for the proletariat in general but will aim at the 
proletariat across a particular concrete group of workers to 
which the person belongs. This is due to the fact that the end 
illuminates the given only because the end is chosen as the sur- 
passing of this given. The for-itself does not arise with a wholly 
given end, but by “making” the situation, the for-itself “makes 
itself” — and conversely. 

(5) Just as the situation is neither objective nor subjec- 
tive, so it can be considered neither as the free result of a 
freedom nor as the ensemble of the constraints to which 
I am subject; it stems from the illumination of the constraint 
by freedom which gives to it its meaning as constraint 
Among brute existents there can be no connection; it is 
freedom which founds the connections by grouping the 
exigents into instrumental-complexes; and it is freedom 
which projects the reason for the connections — ^that is, its 
end. But precisely because I project myself toward an 
end across a world of connections, I now meet with sequences, 

- with linked series, with complexes, and I must determine to 

“C/. the following chapter. 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


705 


act according to laws. These laws and the way I make nse of 
SlmTcMe the failure or the success of my attempts. But it 
ftousTfreedom that legal relations come into the world 
Thus freedom enchains itself in the world as a free proj 

toward ^ds ^ temporalization. This means that 

it is not but that it “makes itself.” It is the situation which 
must account for that substantial permanence which we 
readily recognize in people (“He has not changed. He 
is always the same.”) and which the person experiences 
empirically in most cases as being his own. The free per- 
severance in a single project does not imply any permanence; 
quite the contrary, it is a perpetual renewal of my engage- 
jXiQnt — as we have seen. On the other hand, the realities 
enveloped and illuminated by a project which develops and 
confirms itself present the permanence of the in-itself; and 
to the extent that they refer our image of us, they support iis 
with their everlastingness; in fact it frequently happens 
that we take their permanence for our own. In particular the 
permanence of place and environment, of the judgments passed 
on us by our fellowmen, of our past — all shape a degraded 
image of our perseverance. While I am temporalizing ray- 
self, I am always French, a civil servant or a proletarian for 
others. This unrealizable has the character of an inv^iable 
limit for my situation. 

Similarly what we call a person’s temperament or character 
but which is nothing but his free project in so far as it is- 
' for-the-Other, appears also for the For-itself as an invariable 
unrealizable. Alain has perceived correctly that character- is 
a vow. When a man says, “I am not easy to please,” he 
is entering into a free engagement with his ill-temper, and 
by the same token his words are a free interpretation of certain 
ambiguous details in his past. In this sense there is no" 
character; there is only a project of oneself. But we must 
not, however, misunderstand the given aspect of the character. 
.It is true that for the Other who apprehends me as the Other- 
as-ob]ect, I am ill-tempered, hypocritical or frank, cowardly 
or courageous. This aspect is referred to me by the Other’s 

character, 

which w^ a free- project lived and self-conscious, becomes 
n unrealizable ne varietur to be assumed. It depends then 

taken W,a respect to the Other and on my perseverance 



706 ■ BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

in maintaining this position. So long as I let myself be fasci- 
nated by the Other’s look, my character will figtire in my own 
eyes as an unrealizable ne varietur^ the substantial permanence 
of my being— the kind of thing expressed in such ordinary 
everyday remarks as “I am forty-five years old, and I’m not 
going to start changing myself today.” The Character often 
is what the For-itself tries to recover in order to become the 
In-itself-for-itself which it projects being. Nevertheless 
it should be noted that this permanence of the past, of the 
environment, and of character are not given qualities; ^they 
are revealed on things only in correlation with tihe continuity 
of my project. For example, when after a war, after a long 
exile one finds a particular mountain landscape unchanged, 
it would be in vain to hope to found upon the inertia and 
apparent permanence of these stones the hope for a renas- 
cence of the past. This landscape reveals its permanence only 
across a persevering project These mountains have a meaning 
inside my situation; in one way or another they shape my 
belonging to a nation which is at peace, her own mistress, 
one who holds a certain rank in the international hierarchy. 
Let me find them again after a defeat and during the occupa- 
tion of a part of the national territory, and they can not 
offer me the same countenance. This is because I myself 
have other projects, because I am engaged differently in the 
world. 

Finally we have seen that internal upheavals of the 
situation because of autonomous changes in the environment 
are always to be anticipated. Ihese changes can* never provoke 
a change of my project, but on the foundation of my freedom 
they can effect a simplification or a cornplication of the 
situation. Consequently my initial project will be revealed to 
me with ’more or less simplicity. For a person is never either 
simple or complex; it is his situation which can be one or 
the other. In fact I am nothing but the project of myself 
beyond a determined situation, and this project pre-outlines 
me in terms of the concrete situation as in addition it illu- 
mines the situation in terms of my choice. If therefore the 
situation in its ensemble is simplified, even if landslides, 
cave-ins, erosions have imprinted upon it a well-marked as- 
pect of heavier features with violent contrasts, I shall myself 
. be simple, for my choice — ^the choice which I am — ^is an 
apprehension of this situation here and can only be simple* 
The birth of new complications will have the result of pre* 



BEING AND DOING; FREEDOM 


707 


senting me with a complicated situation beyond which I 
shall find myself complicated. This is something which every- 
one has been able to establish ifi he has observed with what 
almost animal simplicity prisoners of war react following 
the extreme simplification of their situation. This simpli- 
fication can not modify the meaning of their project; but 
on the very foundation of my freedom it causes my environ- 
ment to become condensed and uniform and to be consti- 
tuted in and through a clearer, more brutal, and more 
condensed apprehension of the fundamental ends of the 
-captive person. In short we are dealing with an internal 
metabolism, not with a global metamorphosis which -would 
affect as well the form of the situation. These are, never- 
theless, changes which I discover as changes “in my life”— 
that is, changes within the unitary compass of a single proj- 
ect. 


HI. FREEDOM AND RESPONSIBILITY 

Although the - considerations which are about to follow 
are of interest primarily to the ethicist, it may nevertheless 
be^ worthwhile after these descriptions and arguments to 
return to the freedom of the for-itself and to try to under- 
stand what the fact of this freedom represents for human 
destiny. 

The essential consequence of our earlier remarks is that 
man being condemned to be free carries the weight of the 
whole world on his shoulders; he is responsible for the 
world and for himself as a way of being. We are taking the 
word “responsibility” in its ordinary sense as “conscious- 
ness (of) being the incontestable author of an event or of 
an object.” In this sense the responsibility of the for-itself 
is overwhelming since he^^ is the one by whom it happens that 
there is a world; since he is also the one who makes himr 
self be, then whatever may be the situation in which he finds 
himself, the for-itself must wholly assume this situation with 
its peculiar coefficient of adversity, even though it be in- 
supportable. He must assume the situation with the proud 

Tr. I am shifting to the personal pronoun here since Sartre is describing 
the for-^teelf in concrete personal terms rather than as a metaphysical entity. 
Strictly speaking, of course, this is his position throughout, - and the French 
"il” is indifferenfly “he” or “it.” 



708 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

consciousness of being the author of it, for the very worst 
disadvantages or the worst threats which can endanger my 
person have meaning only in and through my project; 
and it is on the ground of the engagement which I am 
that they appear. It is therefore senseless to think of com- 
plaming since nothing foreign has decided what we feel, 
what we live, or what we are. 

-Furthermore this absolute responsibility is not resignation; 
it is simply the logical requirement of the consequences of 
our freedom. What happens to me happens through me, and I 
can neither afEect myself with- it nor revolt against it nor 
resign myself to it. Moreover everything which happens to 
me is mine. By this we must understand first of all that I am 
always equal to what happens to me qua man, for what 
happens to a man through other men and through himself 
can be only human. The most terrible situations of war, 
the worst tortures do not create a non-human state of things; 
there is no non-human situation. It is only through fear, 
flight, and recourse to magical types of conduct that I shall 
decide on the non-human, but this decision is human, and 
I shall carry the enthe responsibility for it But in addition 
the situation is mine because it is the image of my free choice 
of myself, and everything which it presents to me is mine 
in that this represents me and symbolizes me. Is it not I who 
decide the coefficient of adversity in things and even their 
unpredictability by deciding myself? 

Thus there are no accidents in a life; a community event 
which suddenly bursts forth and involves me in it does not 
come from the outside. If I am mobilized in a war, this 
war is my war; it is in my image and I deserve it. T deserve 
it first because I could always get out of it by suicide or by 
desertion; these ultimate possibles are those which must always 
present for us when there is a question of envisaging a 
situation. For lack of getting out of it, I have chosen it 
This^ can be due to inertia, to cowardice in the face of 
public opinion, or because I prefer certain other values to 
the value of the refusal to join in the war (the good opinion 
of my relatives, the honor of my family, etc.). Any way you 
look at it, it is a matter of a choice. This choice will be 
repeated later on again and again without a break until the 
end of the war. Therefore we must agree with the statement 
by J. Remains, “In war there are no innocent victims.”"® If 

“ J. Romains. Les hommes de bonne volontS. VoL ni: “Prelude h. Verdun.” 



BEING AND DOING: FREEDOM 


709 


therefore I have preferred war to death or to dishonor, every- 
thing takes place as if I bore the entire responsibility for 
this war. Of course others have declared it, and one might 
be tempted perhaps to consider me as a simple accomplice. 
But this notion of complicity has only a juridical sense, and 
it does not hold here. For it depended on me that for me 
and by me this war should not exist, and I have decided that 
it does exist. There was no compulsion here, for the com- 
pulsion could have got no hold on a freedom. I did not have 
any excuse; for as we have said repeatedly in this book, the 
peculiar character of human-reality is that it is without excuse. 
Therefore it remains for me only to lay claim to this war. 

But in addition the war is mine because by the sole fact 
that it arises in a situation which I cause to be and that I 
can discover it there only by engaging myself for or against 
it, I can no longer distinguish at present the choice which 
I make of myself from the choice which I make of the war. 
To live this war is to choose myself through it and to choose 
it through my choice of myself. There can be no question 
of considering it as “four years of vacation” or as a “re- 
prieve,” as a “recess,” the essential part of 'my responsibil- 
ities being elsewhere in my married, family, or professional 
life. In this war which I have chosen I choose myself from 
day to day, and I make it mine by making myself. If it 
is going to be four empty years, then it is I who bear the 
responsibility for this. 

Finally, as we pointed out earlier, each person is an abso- 
lute choice of self from the standpoint of a world of knowl- 
edges and of techniques which this choice both assumes and 
illumines; each person is an absolute upsurge at an absolute 
date and is perfectly unthinkable at another date. It is there- 
fore a waste of time to ask what I should have been if 
this war had not broken out, for I have chosen myself as 
one of the possible meanings of the epoch which impercep- 
tibly led to war. I am not distinct from this same epoch; 
I could not be transported to another epoch without contra- 
diction. Thus I am this war which restricts and limits and 
makes comprehensible the period which preceded it. In this 
sense we may define more precisely the responsibility of 
the for-itself if to the earlier quoted statement, “There are 
no innocent victims,” we add the words, “We have the war 
we deserve.” Thus, totally free, undistinguishable from the 
^ period for which I have chosen to be the meaning, as pro- 


710 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

foundly responsible for the war as if I had myself declared 
it, unable to live without integrating it in my situation, 
engaging myself in it wholly and stamping it with my seal, 
I must be without remorse or regrets as I am without excuse; 
for from the instant of my upsurge into being, I carry the 
weight of the world by myself alone without anything or 
any person being able to lighten it. 

Yet this responsibility is of a very particular type. Some- 
one will say, “I did not ask to be born.” This is a naive 
way of throwing greater emphasis on our facticity. 1 am re- 
sponsible for everything, in fact, except for my very re- 
sponsibility, for I am not the foundation of my being. 
Therefore everything takes place as if I were compelled to 
be responsible. I am abandoned in the world, not in the 
sense that I might remain abandoned and passive in a hostile 
universe like a board floating on the water, but rather in the 
sense that I find myself suddenly alone and without help, 
engaged in a world for which I bear the whole responsibility 
without being able, whatever I do, to tear myself away from 
this responsibility for an instant. For I am responsible for 
my very desire of fleeing responsibilities. To make myself 
passive in the world, to refuse to act upon things and upon 
Others is still to choose myself, and suicide is one mode 
among others of being-in-the-world. Yet I find an absolute 
responsibility for the fact that my facticity (here the fact 
of my birth) is directly inapprehensible and even inconceiv- 
able, for this fact of my birth never appears as a brute fact but 
always across a projective reconstruction of my for-itself. I 
arn ashamed of being bom or I am astonished at it or I 
rejoice over it, or in attempting to get rid of my life I affirm 
that I live and I assume this life as bad. Thus in a certain 
sense I choose being bom. This choice itself is integrally 
affected with facticity since I am not able not to choose, but 
&is facticity in turn will appear only in so far as I surpass 
it toward my ends. Thus facticity is everywhere but inappre- 
hensible; I never encounter anything except ray responsibility. 
That is why I can not ask, “Why was I bom?” or curse the 
day of my birth or declare that I did not ask to be bom, for 
&ese various attitudes toward my birth — i.e., toward the 
fact that I realize a presence in the world — are absolutely 
ways of assuming this birth in full respon- 
sibility and of making it mine. Here again I encounter only 
myself and my projects so that finaUy my abandonment— 





<}iiesL ^ in ^^oUy ^ ^^ply ,. , 

Sfion . ZQ such Tr.^^^PonsiijQ^^^^ 




rr ’^^ibir" ^ for that r 

Undej. 5 ® ^f mvT^ ^ its 1 IJ 

o^n k^ these ^ ^ ^^xdo- /„ ^^iog /#„ , ■*. ^qj ^ 


7JJ 


sza 

aad ^ 

^ap. 


^ bei 


?Ppor- ^ tr^in^- in n,. ^ onh. °e cnn^-t y^t 


eic,) (nn 

■'» Or k . . 


Worjd 




^^y as 

ZQ 


a 

OUT 5 , 




as 






siQce 


a 


S6.? • c “•/•Si"'' J7’“*i^'ir 5 


Til 

tbrc 


Keaif .?'’>«e^" coj^e S ^ 


^e a Or ^ "^ZS VPr». .^Z^o 


.7“^ as v^e Who^rr a or *zs 


ee 




' *osf Of 





CHAPTER TWO 


Doing and Having 


I. EXISTENTIAL PSYCHOANALYSIS 

If it is true that human reality — as we have attempted to 
establish — identifies and defines itself by the ends which it 
pursues, then a study and classification of these ends becomes 
indispensable. In the preceding chapter we have considered 
the For-itself only from the point of view of its free proj- 
ect, which is the impulse by which it thrusts itself toward 
its end. We should now question this end itself, for it forms 
a part of absolute subjectivity and is, in fact, its transcen- 
dent, objective limit. Tliis is what empirical psychology has 
hmted at by admitting that a“ particular man is defined by 
his desires. Here, however, we must be on our guard against 
two errors. First, the empirical psychologist, while defining 
man by his desires, remains the victim of the illusion of 
substance. He views desire as being in man by virtue of 
being “contained” by his consciousness, and he believes that 
the meaning of the desire is inhereht in the desire itself. 
Thus he avoids everything which could evoke the idea of 
transcendence. But if I desire a house or a glass of water or 
a woman’s body, how could this body, this glass, this piece 
of property reside in my desire, and how can my desire be 
anything but the consciousness of these objects as desirable? 
Let us beware then of considering these desires as little -psy- 
chic entities dwelling in consciousness; they are conscious- 

712 



DOING AND HAVING 


713 


ness itself in its original projective, transcendent structure, 
for consciousness is on principle consciousness of something. 

The other error, which fundamentally is closely connected 
with the first, consists in considering psychological research 
as terminated as soon as the investigator has reached the 
concrete ensemble of empirical desires. Thus a man would 
be defined by the bundle of drives or tendencies which 
empirical observation could establish. Naturally the psycholo- 
gist will not always limit himself to making up the sum of 
these tendencies; he will want to bring to light their relation- 
ship, their agreements and harmonies; he will try to 
present the ensemble of desires as a synthetic organization 
in which each desire acts on the others and influences them. 
A critic, for example, wishing to explain the “psychology” 
of Flaubert, will write that he “appeared in his early youth 
to know as his normal state, a continual exaltation resulting 
from the twofold feeling of his grandiose ambition and 
his invincible power. . . . The effervescence of his young 
blood was then turned into literary passion as happens about 
the eighteenth year in precocious souls who find in the energy 
of style or the intensities of fiction some way of escaping 
from the need of violent action or of intense feeling, which 
torments, them.”^ 

In this passage there is an effort to reduce the complex 
personality of an adolescent to a few basic desires, as the 
chemist reduces compound bodies to merely a combination of 
simple bodies. The primitive givens will be grandiose ambi- 
tion, the need of violent action and of intense feeling; these 
elements, when they enter into combination, produce a 
permanent exaltation. Then — as Bourget remarks in a few 
words which we have not quoted — ^this exaltation, nourished 
by numerous well-chosen readings, is going to seek to 
delude itself by self-expression in fictions which will appease 
it symbolically and channel it There in outline is the genesis 
of a literary “temperament.” 

Now in the first place such a psychological analysis pro- 
ceeds from the postulate that an individual fact is produced 
by the intersection of abstract, universal laws. The fact to be 
explained — ^which is here the literary disposition of the 
young Flaubert — is resolved into a combination of typical 
abstract desires such as we meet in “the average adolescent.” 
What is concrete here is only their combination; in themselves 

*Paul Bourget. Essat de Psychologie contemperalne: G. Flaubert. 



714 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

they are only possible patterns. The abstract then^ is by 
hypothesis prior to the concrete, and the^ concrete is only 
an organization of abstract qualities; the individual is only 
the intersection of universal schemata. But — aside from the 
logical absurdity of such a postulate — we see clearly in the 
example chosen, that it simply fails to explain what makes 
the individuality of the . project under consideration. The 
fact that “the need to feel intensely,” a universal pattern, 
is disguised and channeled into becoming the need to write — 
this is not the explanation of the “calling” of Flaubert; on 
the contrary, it is what must be explained. Doubtless one 
could invoke a thousand circumstances, known to us and 
unknown, which have shaped this need to feel into the 
need to act. But this is to give up at the start all attempt to 
explain and refers the question to the undiscoverable." In 
addition this method rejects the pure individual who has 
been banished from the pure subjectivity of Flaubert into 
the external circumstances of his life. Finally, Flaubert’s 
correspondence proves that long before the “crisis of adoles- 
cence,” from his earliest childhood, he was tormented by 
the need to write. 

At each stage in the description just quoted, we meet 
with a hiatus. Why did ambition and the feeling of his 
power produce in Flaubert exaltation rather than tranquil 
waiting or gloomy impatience? Why did this exaltation 
express itself specifically in the need to act violently and 
feel intensely? Or rather why does this need make a^sudden 
appearance by spontaneous generation at the end of the 
paragraph? And why does this need instead of seeking to 
appease itself in acts of violence, by amorous adventures, 
or in debauch, choose precisely to satisfy itself symbolically? 
And why does Flaubert turn to writing rather than to paint- 
ing or music for this symbolic satisfaction; he could just as 
well not resort to the artistic field at all (there is also mysti- 
cism, for example). “I could have been a great actor,” wrote 
Flaubert somewhere. Why did he not try to be one? In a 
word, we have understood nothing; we have seen a* succes- 
sion of accidental happenings, of desire springing forth fully 
armed, one from the other, with no possibility for us to 
grasp their genesis. The transitions, the becomings, the trans- 

® Since Flaubert’s adolescence, so far as we can know it, offers us nothing 
specific in this connection, we must suppose the action of imponderable facts 
which on principle escape the critic. 



715 


DOING AND HAVING 

formations, have been carefuUy veiled from us, and we have 
been limited to putting order into the succession by invok- 
ing empirically established but literally uninteUigible se- 
quences (the need to act preceding in the adolescent the need 

to write). . * 

Yet this is called psychology! Open any biography at 
random, and this is the kind of description which you will 
find more or less interspersed with accounts of external events 
and allusions to the great explanatory idols of our epoch 
heredity, education, environment, physiological constitution. 
Occasionally, in the better works the connection established 
between antecedent arid consequent or between two con- 
comitant desires and their reciprocal action is not conceived 
merely as a type of regular sequence; sometimes it is “compre- 
hensible” in the sense which Jaspers understands in his 
general treatise on psychopathology. But this comprehension 
remains a grasp of general connections. For example we will 
realize the link between chastity and mysticism, between 
fainting and hypocrisy. But we are ignorant always of the 
concrete relation between this chastity (this abstinence in 
relation to a particular woman, this struggle against a definite 
temptation) and the individual content of' the 'mysticism; in 
the same way psychiatry is too quickly satisfied when it 
throws light on the general structures of delusions and does 
not seek to comprehend the individual, concrete content of 
the psychoses (why this man believes himself to be that 
particular historical personality rather than some other; why 
his compensatory delusion is satisfied with specifically these 
ideas of grandeur instead of others, etc.). 

But most important of all, these “psychological” explana- 
tions refer us ultimately to inexplicable original givens. These 
are the simple bodies of psychology. We are told, for exam- 
ple, that Flaubert had a “grandiose ambition” and all of the 
previously quoted description depends on this original ambi- 
tion. So far so good. But this ambition is an irreducible fact 
which by no means satisfies the mind. The irreducibility here 
has no justification other than refusal to push the analysis 
further. There where the psychologist stops, the fact con- 
fronted is given as primary. This is why we experience a 
troubled feeling of mingled resignation and dissatisfactiori 
when we read these psychological treatises. “See,” we sav 
to ourselves, “Flaubert was ambitious. He was that kind of 
man.” It would be as futile to ask why he was such as to seek 



716 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

to know why he was talDand blond. Of course we have to 
stop somewhere; it is the very contingency of all real exis- 
tence. This rock is covered with moss, the rock next to it 
is not. Gustave Flaubert had literary ambition, and his 
brother Achille lacked it. That’s the way it is. In the same 
way we want to know the properties of phosphorus, and we 
attempt to reduce them to the structure of the chemical 
molecules which compose it. But why are there molecules 
of this type? That’s the way it is, that’s all. The explanation 
of Flaubert’s psychology will consist, if it is possible, in 
referring the complexity of his behavior patterns, his 
feelings, and his tastes back to certain properties, compar- 
able to those of chemical bodies, beyond which it would 
be foolish to attempt to proceed. Yet we feel obscurely that 
Flaubert had not “received” his ambition. It is meaningful; 
therefore it is free. Neither heredity, nor bourgeois back- 
ground nor education can account for it, stdl less those, 
physiological considerations regarding the “nervous temper- 
ament,” which have been the vogue for some time now. 
The nerve is not meaningful; it is a colloidal substance which 
can be described in itself and which does not have the qual- 
ity of transcendence; that is, it does not transcend itself in' 
order to make known to itself by means of other realities ' 
what it is. Under no circumstances could the nerve furnish 
the basis for meaning. In one sense Flaubert’s ambition is a 
fact with all a fact’s contingency — and it is true that it is 
impossible to advance beyond that fact — but in another sense 
it makes itself, and our satisfaction is a guarantee to us 
that we may be able to grasp beyond this ambition some- 
thing more, something like a radical decision which, without 
ceasing to be contingent, would be the veritable psychic . 
irreducible. 

What we are demanding then — and what nobody ever 
attempts to give us — is a veritable irreducible;' that is, an 
irreducible of which the irreducibility would be self-evident, 
which would not be presented as the postulate of the psychol- 
ogist and the result of his refusal or his incapacity to go fur- 
ther, but which when established would produce in us an ac- 
companying feeling of satisfaction. This demand on our part 
does not come from that ceaseless pursuit of a cause, that in- 
finite regress which has often been described as constitutive 
of rational research and which consequently — ^far from being 
exclusively associated with psychological investigation — may 



DOING AND HAVING 717 

be found in all disciplines and in all problems. This is not 
the childish quest of a “because,” which allows no fur- 
ther “why?” It is on the .contrary a demand based on a 
pre-ontological comprehension of human reality and on the 
related refusal to consider man as capable of being analyzed 
and reduced to . original givens, to determined desires 
(or “drives”), supported by the subject as properties by an 
object. Even if we were to consider him as such, it would 
be necessary to chooser either Flaubert, the man, whom 
we can love or detest, blame or praise, who represents for 
us the Other, who directly attacks our being by the very, 
fact that he has existed, would-.be originally a substratum 
unqualified by these desires, that is, a sort of indeterminate 
clay which would have to receive them passively; or he would 
be reduced to the simple bundle of these irreducible drives 
or tendencies. In either case the man disappears; we can no 
longer find “the one” to whom this or that experience has 
happened; either in looking for the person, we encounter 
a useless, contradictory metaphysical substance — or else the 
being whom we seek vanishes in a dust of phenomena bound 
together by external connections. But what each one of us 
requires in his very effort to comprehend another is that he 
should never have to resort to this idea of substance which 
is inhuman because it is well this side of the human. Finally 
the fact is that the being considered does not crumble into 
dust, and one can discover in him that unity — ^for which 
substance was only a caricature — ^which must be a unity of 
responsibility, a unity agreeable or hateful, blamable and 
prmseworthy, in short personal. This unity, which is the 
being of the man under consideration, is a free unification, 
and this unification can not come after a diversity which 
it unifies. 

But to be, for Flaubert, as for every subject of “biography,” 
means to be unified in the world. The ureducible unifi- 
c^on which we ought to find, which is Flaubert, and 
which we require biographers to reveal to us — ^this is the 
unification of an original project, a unification which should 
reveal itself to us as a non-substantial absolute. Therefore 
we should forego these so-called irreducible details - and 
taking the very evidence of them for a criterion, not ston 
in our investigation before it is evident that we neither can 
nor ought to go any further. In particular we must avoid 
trying to reconstruct a person by means of his inclinations 



718 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

. just as Spinoza warns us not to attempt to reconstruct a sub- 
stance or its attributes by the summation of its modes. Every 
desire if presented as an irreducible is an absurd contingency 
and involves in absurdity human reality taken as a whole. 
For example, if I declare of one of my friends that he “likes 
to go rowing,” I deliberately intend to stop my investigation 
there. But on the other hand, I thus establish a contingent 
fact, which nothing can explain and which, though it has 
the gratuity of free decision, by no means has its autonomy. 
I can not in fact consider this fondness for rowing as the 
fundamental project of Pierre; it contains something secon- 
dary and derived. Those who portray a character in this 
way by successive strokes come close to holding that each 
of these strokes — each one of the desires confronted — is 
bound to the others by connections which are purely con- 
tingent and simply external. Those who, on the other hand, 
try to explain this liking will fall into the view of what 
Comte called materialism; that is, of explaining the higher 
by the lower. Someone will say, for example, that the subject 
considered is a sportsman who likes violent exercise and is in 
addition a man of the outdoors who especially likes open 
air sports. By more general and less differentiated tendencies 
he will try to explain this desire, which stands in exactly the 
same relation to them as the zoological species does to the 
genus. Thus the psychological explanation, when it does not 
suddenly decide to stop, is sometimes the mere putting into 
relief relations of pure concomitance or of constant succes- 
sion, and it is at other times a simple classification. To explain 
Pierre’s fondness for rowing is to make it a member of the 
family of fondness for open air sports and to attach this 
family to that of fondness for sports in general. Moreover we 
will be able to find still more general and barren rubrics if 
we classify the taste for sports as one aspect of the love of 
chance, which will itself be given as a specific instance of 
the fundamental fondness for play. It is obvious that this 
so-called explanatory classification has no more value or 
interest than the classification in ancient botany; like the 
latter it amounts to assuming the priority of the abstract 
over the concrete- — as if the fondness for play existed first 
in general to be subsequently made specific by the action 
of these circumstances in the love of sport, the latter in the 
fondness for rowing, and finally the rowing in the desire to 
row on a particular stream, under certain circumstances in a 



719 


doing and having 


particular season— and like the ancient classifications it fails 
to explain the concrete' enrichment which at each stage is 
undergone by the abstract inclination considered. 

Furthermore how are we to believe that a desire to row is 
only a desire to row? Can we truthfully admit that it c^ be 
reduced so simply to what it is? The most discernmg ethicists 
have shown how a desire reaches beyond itself. Pascal believed 
that he could discover in hunting, for example, of tennis, 
or in a hundred other occupations, the need of being diverted. 
He revealed that in an activity which would be absurd if 
reduced to itself, there was, a meaning which transcended it, 
that is, an indication which referred to the reality of man 
in general and to his condition. Similarly Stendhal in spite 
of his attachment to ideologists, and Proust in spite of his 
intellectualistic and analytical tendencies, have shown that 
love and jealousy can not be reduced to the strict desire 
of possessing a particular woman, but that these emotions 
aim at laying hold of the world in its entirety through the 
woman. This is the meaning of Stendhal’s crystallization, 
and' it is precisely f of this reason that love as Stendhal de- 
, scribes it' appears as a mode of being in the world. Love is 
a fundamental relation of the for-itself to the world and to 


itself (selfness) through a particular woman; the woman 
represents only a conducting body which is placed in the 
circuit'. These' analyses may be inexact or only partially true; 
never&eless they make us suspect a method other than pure 
analytical description. In the same way Catholic novelists 
immediately see in carnal love its surpassing toward God — in 
Don Juan, “the eternally unsatisfied,” in sin, “the place 
empty of God.” There is no question here of finding again 
^ abstract behind the concrete; the impulse toward God 
is no less concrete than the impulse toward a particidar 
woman. On the contrary, it is a matter of rediscovering 
under the partial and incomplete aspects of the subject the 
veritable concreteness which can be only the totality of his 
impulse toward being, his original relation to himself, to the 
world, and to the Other, in the unity of internal relations 
and of a fundamental project. This impulse can be only 
purely individual and unique. Far from estranging us from 
the person, as Bourget’s analysis, for example, does in 
constituting the individual by means of a summation of 
general maxims, this impose will not lead us to find in the 
need of writing — and of writing particular books — the need' 



720 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

of activity in general. On the contrary, rejecting equally the 
theory of malleable clay and that of the bundle of drives, we 
will discover the individual person in the initial project 
which constitutes him. It is for this reason that the irreduci- 
bility of the result attained will be revealed as self-evident, 
not because it is the poorest and the most abstract but be- 
cause it is the richest. The intuition here will be accompanied 
by an individual fullness. 

The problem poses itself in approximately these terms: 
If we admit that the person is a totality, we can not hope 
to reconstruct him by an addition or by an organization of 
the diverse tendencies which we have empirically discovered 
in him. On the contrary, in each inclination, in each ten- 
dency the person expresses himself completely, although from 
a different angle, a little as Spinoza’s substance expresses 
itself completely in each of its attributes. But if this is so, we 
should discover in each tendency, in each attitude of the 
subject, a meaning which transcends it. A jealousy of a partic- 
ular date in which a subject historicizes himself in relation 
to a certain woman, signifies for the one who knows how to 
interpret it, the total relation to the world by which the sub- 
ject constitutes himself as a self. In other words this empiri- 
cal attitude is by itself the expression of the “choice of an 
intelligible character.” There is no mystery about this. We no 
longer have to do with an intelligible pattern which can 
be present in our thought only, while we apprehend and 
conceptualize the unique pattern of the subject’s empirical 
existence. If the empirical attitude signifies the choice of 
the intelligible character, it is because it is itself this choice. 
Indeed the distinguishing characteristic of the intelligible 
choice, as we shall see later, is that it can exist only as 
the transcendent meaning of each concrete, empirical choice. 
It is by no means first effected in some unconscious or on 
the noumenal level to be subsequently expressed in a partic- 
ular observable attitude; there is not even an ontological 
pre-eminence over the empirical choice, but it is on principle 
that which must always detach itself from the empirical 
choice as its beyond and the infinity of its transcendence. 
Thus if I am rowing on the river, I am nothing — either 
here or in any other world — save this concrete project of 
rowing. But this project itself, inasmuch as it is the totality 
of my being, expresses my original choice in particular 
circumstances; it is nothing other than the choice of myself 



DOING AND HAVING 


721 


as a totality in these circumstances. That is why a special 
method must aim at detaching the fundamental meaning 
which the project admits and which can be only the individ- 
ual secret of the subject’s being-in-the-world. It is then 
rather by a comparison of the various empirical drives of a 
subject &at we try to discover and disengage the fundamental 
project which is common to them all — and not by a simple 
summation or reconstruction of these tendencies; each drive 
or tendency is the entire person. 

There is naturally an infin ity of possible projects as there 
is an infinity of possible human beings. Nevertheless, if 
we are to recognize certain common characteristics among 
them and if we are going to attempt to classify them in 
larger categories, it is best first to undertake individual inves- 
tigations in the cases which we can study more easily. In 
our research, we will be guided by this principle: to stop 
only in the presence of evident irreducibility; that is, never 
to believe that we have reached the initial project until the 
projected end appears as the very being of the subject under 
consideration. This is why we can not stop at those classifi- 
cations of “authentic project” and “unauthentic project of 
the self” which Heidegger wishes to establish. In addition 
to the fact that such a classification, in spite of its author’s 
intent, is tainted with an ethical concern shown by its very 
terminology, it is based on the attitude of the subject toward 
his own death. Now if death causes anguish, and if con- 
sequently we can either flee the anguish or throw ourselves 
resolutely into it, it is a truism to say that this is because we 
wish to hold on to life. Consequently anguish before death 
and resolute decision or flight into unauthenticity can not 
be considered as fundamental projects of our being. On the 
contrary, they can be understood only on the foundation of 
an original project of living; that is, on an original choice 
of our being. It is right then in each case to pass beyond the 
results of Heidegger’s interpretation toward a still more 
fundamental project. 

This fundamental project must not of course refer to 
any other and should be conceived by itself. It can be con- 
cerned neither with death nor life nor any particular charac- 
teristic of the human condition; the original project of a 
for-itself can aim only at its being. The project of being 
or desire of being or drive toward being does not originate 
in a physiological dMerentiation or in an empirical contin- 



722 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

gency; in fact it is not distinguished from the being of the 
for-itself. The for-itself is a being such that in its being, its 
being is in question in the form of a project of being. To 
the for-itself being means to make known to oneself 
what one is by means of a possibility appearing as a value. 
Possibility and value belong to the being of the for-itself. 
The for-itself is defined ontologically as a lack of being, and 
possibility belongs to the for-itself as that which it lacks, in 
the same way that value haunts the for-itself as the totality 
of being which is lacking. What we have expressed in Part 
Two in terms of lack can be just as well expressed in terms 
of freedom. The for-itself chooses because it is lack; freedom 
is really synonymous with lack. Freedom is the concrete mode 
of being of the lack of being. Ontologically then it amounts 
to the same thing to say that value and possibility exist 
as internal limits of a lack of being which can exist only 
as a lack of being — or that the upsurge of freedom deter- 
mines its possibility and thereby circumscribes its value. 

Thus we can advance no further but have encountered the 
self-evident irreducible when we have reached the project of 
being; for obviously it is impossible to advance further than 
being, and there is no difference between the proj- 
ect of being, possibility, value, on the one hand, and being, 
on the other. Fundamentally man is tbe desire to be, and 
the existence of this desire is not to be established by an 
empirical induction; it is the result of an a priori description 
of the being of the for-itself, since desire is a lack and since 
the for-itself is the being which is to itself its own lack of 
being. The original project which is expressed in each of 
our empirically observable tendencies is then the project of 
being; or, if you prefer, each empirical tendency exists with 
the original project of being, in a relation of expression 
and symbolic satisfaction just as conscious drives, with 
Freud, exist in relation to the complex and to the original 
libido. Moreover the desire to be by no means exists first in 
order to cause itself to be expressed subsequently by desires 
a posteriori. There is nothing outside of the symbolic expres- 
sion which it finds in concrete desires. There is not first a 
single desire of being, then a thousand particular feelings, 
Imt the desire to be exists and manifests itself only in and 
through jealousy, greed, love of art, cowardice, courage, and 
a thousand contingent, empirical expressions which always 



723 


DOING AND HAVING 

cause human reality to appear to us only as manifested by 
aparticM/ar man, by a specific person. _ 

As for the being which is the object of this desire, we 
know a priori what this is. The for-itself is being 
which is to itself its own lack of being. The being which 
the for-itself lacks is the in-itself. The for-itself arises as 
the nihilation of the in-itself and this nihilation is defeed as 
the project toward the in-itself. Between the nihilated in-itself 
and the projected in-itself the for-itself is nothingness. Thus 
the end and the goal of the nihilation which I am is the in- 
itself. Thus human reality, is the desire of being-in-itself. 
But the in-itself which it desires can not be pure contingent, 
absurd in-itself, comparable at every point to that which it 
encounters and which it rdhilates. The nihilation, as we have 
seen, is in fact like a revolt of the in-itself, which nihilates 
itself against its contingency. To say that the for-itself lives 
its facticity, as we have seen in the chapter concerning the 
body, amounts to saying that the nihilation is the vain effort 
of a being to found its own being and that it is the with- 
drawal to found being which provokes the minute displace- 
ment by which nothingness enters into being. The being which 
forms the object of the desire of the for-itself is then an in- , 
itself which would be to itself its own foundation; that is, 
which would be to its facticity in the same relation as the 
for-itself is to its motivations. In addition the for-itself, being 
the negation of the in-itself, could not desire the pure and 
simple return to the in-itself. Here as with Hegel, the riegation 
of the negation can not bring us back to our point of de- 
parture. Quite the contrary, what the for-itself demands of 
the in-itself is precisely the totality detotalized — “In-itself 
nilulated in for-itself,” In other words the for-itself projects 
being as for-itself, a being which is what it is. It is as 
being which is what it is not, and which is not what it is, that 
the for-itself projects being what it is. It is as consciousness 
that ^ it wishes to have the impermeability and infinite 
density of the in-itself. It is as the nihilation of the in-itself 
? perpetual evasion of contingency and of facticity 
that it wishes to-be its own foundation. This is why the 
possible is projected in general as what the for-itself lacks 
m order to become in-itself-for-itself. The fundamental 
value which presides over this project is exactly the in-itself- 
lor-itself; that is, the ideal of a consciousness which would 
oe the foundation of its own being-in-itself by the pure 



724 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

consciousness which it would have of itself. It is this ideal 
which can be called God. Thus the best way to conceive of 
the fundamental project of human reality is to say that 
man is the being whose project is to be God. Whatever may 
be the myths and rites of the religion considered, God is 
first “sensible to the heart” of man as the one who identifies 
and defines him in his ultimate and fundamental project. 
If man possesses a pre-ontological comprehension of the 
being of God, it is not the great wonders of nature nor 
the power of society which have conferred it upon him. God, 
value and supreme end of transcendence, represents the 
permanent limit in terms of which man makes known to 
himself what he is. To be man means to reach toward being 
God. Or if you prefer, man fundamentally is the desire to 
be God. 

It may be asked, if man on coming into the world is borne 
toward God as toward his limit, if he can choose only to 
be God, what becomes of freedom? For freedom is nothing 
other than a choice which creates for itself its own pos- 
sibilities, but it appears here that the initial project of being 
God, which “defines” man, comes close to being the same as 
a human “nature” or an “essence.” The answer is that while 
the meaning of the desire is ultimately the project of being 
God, the desire is never constituted by this meaning; on the 
contrary, it always represents a particular discovery of its ends. 
These ends in fact are pursued in terms of a particular em- 
pirical situation, and it is this very pursuit which consti- 
tutes the surroundings as a situation. The desire of being 
is always realized as the desire of a mode of "being. And 
this desire of a mode , of being expresses itself in turn as 
the meaning of the m5n:iads of concrete desires which consti- 
tute the web of our conscious life. Thus we find ourselves 
before very complex symbolic structures which have at 
least three stories. In empirical-desire I can discern a sym- 
bolization of a fundamental concrete desire which is the person 
himself and which represents the mode in which he has de- 
cided that being would be in question in his being. This 
fundamental desire in turn expresses concretely in the world 
within the particular situation enveloping the individual, 
an abstract meaningful structure which is the desire of being 
in general; it must be considered as human reality in the 
person, and it brings about his community with others, thus 
making it possible to state that there is a truth concerning 



DOING AND HAVING 725 

man and not only concerning individuals who can not be 
compared. Absolute concreteness, completion, existence as 
a totality belong then to the free and fundamental desire 
which is the unique person. Empirical desire is only a sym- 
bolization of this; it refers to this and derives its meaning 
from it while remaining partial and reducible, for the 
empirical desire can not be conceived in isolation. On the 
other hand, the desire of being in its abstract purity is the 
truth of the concrete fundamental desire, but it does not 
exist by virtue of reality. Thus the fundamental project, the 
person, the free realization of human truth is everywhere in 
all desires (save for those exceptions treated in the preceding 
chapter, concerning, for example, “indifferents”)- It is never 
apprehended except through desires — as we can apprehend 
space only through bodies which shape it for us, though 
space is a specific reality and not a concept. Or, if you like, it 
is like the object, of Husserl, which reveals itself only by 
Abschattungen, and which nevertheless does not allow itself 
to be absorbed by any one Abschattung. We can understand 
after these remarks that the abstract, ontological “desire to . 
be” is unable to represent the fundamental, human structure 
of the individual; it can not be an obstacle to his freedom. 
Freedom in fact, as we. have shown in the preceding chapter, 
is strictly identified with nihilation. The only being which 
can be called free is the being which nihilates its being. 
Moreover we know that nihilation is lack of being and 
can not be otherwise. Freedom is precisely the being which 
makes itself a lack of being. But since desire, as we have 
established, is identical with lack of being, freedom can 
arise only as being which makes itself a desire of being; that 
IS, as the project-for-itself of being in-itself-for-itself. Here 
we have arrived at an abstract structure which can by no means 
be considered as the nature or essence of freedom. Freedom 
IS existence, and in it existence precedes essence. The up- 
surge of freedom is immediate and concrete and is not 
to be distinguished from its choice; that is, from the person 
h^elf. But the structure rmder consideration can be called 

truth of freedom; that is, it is the human meaning 
of freedom. ® 

It should be possible to establish the human truth of the 
person, as we have attempted to do by an ontological phenom- 
enology. The catalogue of empirical desires ought to be 
made the object of appropriate psychological investigations. 



726 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

observation and induction and, as needed, experience can 
serve to draw up this list. They will indicate to the philosopher 
the comprehensible relations which can unite to each other 
various desires and various patterns of behaviors, and will 
bring to light certain concrete connections between the 
subject of experience and “situations” experientially defined 
(which at bottom originate ..only from limitations applied 
in the name of positivity to the fundamental situation of 
the subject in the world). But in establishing and classifying 
fundamental desires of individual persons neither of these 
methods is appropriate. Actually there can be no question of 
determining a priori and ontologically what appears in all the 
unpredictability of a free act. This is why we shall limit 
ourselves here to indicating very summarily the possibilities 
of such a quest and its perspectives. The very fact that we 
can subject any man whatsoever to such an investigation — 
that is what belongs to human reality in general. Or, if you 
prefer, this is what can be established by an ontology. But 
the inquiry itself and its results are on principle wholly out- 
side the possibilities of an ontology. 

On the other hand, pure, simple empirical despription can 
only give us catalogues and put us in the presence of pseudq- 
irreducibles (the desire to write, to svrim, a taste for adven- 
ture, jealousy, etc.). It is not enough in fact to draw up a 
list of behavior patterns, of drives and inclinations, it 
is necessary also to decipher them; that is, it is necessary to 
know how to question them. This research can be conduct- 
ed only according to the rules of a specific method. It is this 
method which we call existential psychoanalysis. 

The principle of this psychoanalysis is that man is a 
totality and not a collection. Consequently he expresses hknzr 
self as a whole in even his most insignificant and his most 
superficial behavior. In other words there is not a taste, a 
mannerism, or a human act which is not revealing. 

The goal of psychoanalysis is to decipher the empirical 
behavior patterns of man; that is to bring out in the open 
the revelations which each one of them contains and to fix 
them conceptually 

Its point of departure -is experience; its pillar of support 
is the fundamental, pre-ontological comprehension which 
man has of the human person. Although the majority 
of people can well ignore the indications contained 
in a gesture, a word, a sign and can look with scorn on 



DOING AND HAVING 


W 


the revelation which they carry, each human individual never- 
theless possesses a priori the meaning of the revelatory value 
of these manifestations and is capable of deciphering them, 
at least if he is aided and guided by a helping hand. Here 
as elsewhere, truth is not encountered by chance; it does not 
belong to a domain where one must seek it without ever 
having any presentiment of its location, as one can go to 
look for the source of the Nile or of the Niger. It belongs 
a priori to human comprehension and the essential task is 
an hermeneutic; that is, a deciphering, a determination, and 
a conceptualization. 

Its method is comparative. Since each example of human 
conduct symbolizes in its own manner the fundamental 
choice which must be brought to light, and since at the 
same time each one disguises this choice under its occa- 
sional character and its historical opportunity, only the 
comparison of these acts of conduct can effect the emergence 
of the unique revelation which they all express in a differ- 
ent way. The first outline of this method has been furnished 
for us by the psychoanalysis of Freud and his disciples. For 
this reason it will be profitable here to indicate more specif- 
ically the points where existential psychoanalysis will be 
inspired by psychoanalysis proper and those where it will 
radically differ from it. 

Both kinds of psychoanalysis consider all objectively dis- 
cernible manifestations of “psychic life” as symbols main- 
taining symbolic relations to the fundamental, total structures 
which constitute the individual person. Both consider that 
there are no primary givens such as hereditary dispositions, 
character, etc. Existential psychoanalysis recognizes nothing 
before the original upsurge of human freedom; empirical 
psychoanalysis holds that the original affectivity of the individ- 
ual is virgin wax before its history. The libido is nothing 
besides its concrete fixations, save for a permanent possibility 
of fixing anything whatsoever upon anything whatsoever. 
Both consider the human being as a perpetual, searching 
historization. Rather than uncovering static, constant givens 
they discover the meaning, orientation, and adventures of 
this history. Due to this fact both consider man in the world 
and do not imagine that one can question the being of a 
man without taking into account all his situation. Psycho- 
logical investigations aim at reconstituting the life of the sub- 
ject from birth to the moment of the cure; they utilize all 



728 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

th.6 objective documentation which they can find, letters, 
witnesses, intimate diaries, “social” information of every 
kind. What they aim at restoring is less a pure psychic event 
than a twofold structure: the crucial event of infancy and the 
psychic crystallization around this event. Here again we have 
to do with a situation. Each “historical” fact from this 
point of view will be considered at once as a factor of the 
psychic evolution and as a symbol of that evolution. For it 
is nothing in itself. It operates only according to the way in 
which it is taken and this very manner of taking it expresses 
symbolically the internal disposition of the individual. 

Empirical psychoanalysis and existential psychoanalysis 
both search within an existing situation for a fundamental 
attitude which can not be expressed by simple, logical 
definitions because it is prior to all logic, and which requires 
reconstruction according to the laws of specific syntheses. 
Empirical psychoanalysis seeks to determine the complex, 
the very name of which indicates the polyvalence of all the 
meanings which are referred back to it. Existential psycho- 
analysis seeks to determine the original choice. This 
original choice operating in the face of the world and being 
a choice of position in the world is total like the complex, 
it is prior to logic like the complex. It is this which decides 
the attitude of the person^ when confronted with logic and 
principles, therefore there can be no possibility of question- 
ing it in conformance to logic. It brings together in a pre- 
iogical synthesis the totality of the existent, and as such it 
is the center of reference for an infinity of polyvalent 
meanings. 

Both our psychoanalyses' refuse to admit that the subject 
is in a privileged position to proceed in these inquiries con- 
cerning himself. They equally insist on a strictly objective 
method, using as documentary evidence the data of reflection 
as well as the testimony of others. Of course the subject 
can undertake a psychoanalytic investigation of himself. 
But in this case he must renounce at the outset all benefit 
stemming from his peculiar position and must question 
himself exactly as if he were someone else. Empirical psycho- 
analysis in fact is based on the hypothesis of the existence of ^ 
an unconscious psyche, which on principle escapes the intui- 
tion of the subject. Existential psychoanalysis rejects the hy- 
pothesis of the unconscious; it makes the psychic act co-exten- 
sive with consciousness. But if the fundamental project is fully 



DOING AND HAVING 


729 


experienced by the subject and hence wholly conscious, that 
certainly does not mean that it must by the same token be 
known by him; quite the contrary. The reader will perhaps re- 
call the care we took in the Introduction to distinguish between 
consciousness and knowledge. To be sure, as we have seen 
earlier, reflection can be considered as a quasi-knowledge. 
But what it grasps at each moment is not &e pure project 
of the for-itself as it is s3anbolically expressed — often in 
several ways at once — by the concrete behavior which it 
apprehends. It grasps the concrete behavior itself; that is, 
the specific dated desire in all its characteristic network. It 
grasps at once symbol and symbolization. This apprehension, 
to be sure, is entirely constituted by a pre-ontological com- 
prehension of the fundamental project; better yet, in so far 
as reflection is almost a non-thetic consciousness of itself as 
reflection, it is this same project, as well as the non-refiec- 
tive consciousness. But it does not follow that it commands 
the instruments and techniques necessary to isolate the 
choice symbolized, to fix it by concepts, and to bring it forth 
into the full light of day. It is penetrated by a great light 
without being able to express what this light is illuminating. 
We are not dealing with an unsolved riddle as the Freudians 
believe; all is there, luminous; reflection is in full possession 
of it, apprehends all. But this “mystery in broad daylight” 
is due to the fact that this possession is deprived of the 
means which would ordinarily permit analysis and con- 
ceptualization. It grasps everjrthing, all at once, without 
shading, without relief, without connections of grandeur — 
not that these shades, these values, these reliefs exist some- 
where and are hidden from it, but rather because they must 
be established by another human attitude and because 
they can exist only by means of and for knowledge. Reflec- 
tion, unable to serve as the basis for existential psycho- 
analysis, will then simply furnish us with the brute materials 
toward which the psychoanalyst must take an objective 
attitude. Thus only will he be able to know what he already 
understands. The result is that complexes uprooted from 
the depths of the unconscious, like projects revealed by exis- 
tential psychoanalysis, will be apprehended from the point of 
view of the Other. Consequently the object thus brought into 
the light will be articulated according to the structures of 
the transcended-transcendence; that is, its being will be the 
being-for-others even if the psychoanalyst and the subject 



730 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

of the psychoanalysis are actually the same person. Thus the 
project which is brought to light by either kind of psycho- 
analysis can be only the totality of the individual human 
being, the irreducible element of the transcendence with the 
structure of being-for-others. What always escapes these 
methods of investigation is the project as it is for itself, the 
complex in its own being. This project-for-itself can be 
experienced only as a living possession; there is an incom- 
patibility between existence for-itself and objective exis- 
tence. But the object of the two psychoanalyses has in it 
nonetheless the reality of a being; the subject’s knowledge 
of it can in addition contribute to clarify reflection, and 
that reflection can then become a possession which will be a 
quasi-knowing. 

At this point the similarity between the two kinds of 
psychoanalysis ceases. They differ fundamentally in that em- 
pirical psychoanalysis has decided upon its own irreducible 
instead of allowing this to make itself known in a self- 
evident intuition. The libido or the will to power in actual- 
ity constitutes a psycho-biological residue which is not 
clear in itself and which does not appear to us as being be- 
forehand the irreducible limit of the investigation. Finally 
it is experience which establishes that the foundation of com- 
plexes is this libido or this will to power; and these results 
of empirical inquiry are perfectly contingent, they are not 
convincing. Nothing prevents our conceiving a priori of a 
“human reality” which would not be expressed by the will 
to power, for the libido would not constitute the original, 
undifferentiated project. 

On the other hand, the choice to which existential psy- 
choanalysis will lead us, precisely because it is a choice', 
accounts for its original contingency, for the contingency 
of the choice is the reverse side of its freedom. Furthermore, 
inasmuch as it is established on the lack of being, conceived 
as a fundamental characteristic of being, it receives its 
legitimacy as a choice, and we know that we do not have 
to push further. Each result then will be at once fully con- 
tingent and legitimately irreducible. Moreover it will always 
remain particular; that is, we will not achieve as the ulti- 
mate goal of our investigation and the foundation of all 
behavior an abstract, general term, libido for example, 
which would be differentiated and made concrete first in 



DOING AND HAVING 


731 


complexes and then in detailed acts of conduct, due to the 
action of external facts and the history of the subject. On 
the contrary, it will be a choice which remains unique 
and which is from the start absolute concreteness. Details of 
behavior can express or particularize this choice, but they 
can not make it more concrete than it already is. That is be- 
cause the choice is nothing other than the being of each human 
reality; this amounts to saying that a particular partial be- 
havior is or expresses the original choice of this human reality 
since for human reality there is no difference between existing 
and choosing for itself. From this fact we understand that ex- 
istential psychoanalysis does not have to proceed from the 
fundamental “complex,” which is exactly the choice of being, 
to an abstraction like the libido which would explain it. The 
complex is the ultimate choice, it is the choice of being and 
makes itself such. Bringing it into the light will reveal it- 
each time as evidently irreducible. It follows necessarily 
that the libido and the will to power will appear to existen- 
tial psychoanalysis neither as general characteristics common 
to all mankind nor as irreducibles. At most it will be pos- 
sible after the investigation to establish that they express by 
virtue of particular ensembles in certain subjects a funda- 
mental choice which can not be reduced to either one of 
them. We have seen in fact that desire and sexuality in gen- 
eral express an original effort of the for-itself to recover 
its being which has become estranged through contact with 
the Other. The will to power also originally supposes being- 
for-others, the comprehension of the Other, and the choice 
of winning its own salvation by means of the Other. The 
foundation of this attitude must be an original choice 
which would make us understand the radical identification 
of being-in-itself-for-itself with being-for-others. 

'Hie fact that the ultimate term of this existential in- 
quiry must be a choice distinguishes even better the psycho- 
analysis for which we have outlined the method and princi- 
pal features. It thereby abandons the supposition that the 
environment acts mechanically on the subject under consid- 
eration. The environment can act on the subject only to the 
exact extent that he comprehends it; that is, transforms it 
into a situation. Hence no objective description of this en- 
vironment could" be of any use to us. From the start the 
environment conceived as a situation refers to the for-itself 



732 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

which is choosing, just as the for-itself refers to the envi- 
ronment by the very fact that the for-itself is in the world. 
By renouncing all mechanical causation, we renounce at the 
same time all general interpretation of the symbolization 
confronted. Our goal could not be to establish empirical laws 
of succession, nor could we constitute a universal symbol- 
ism. Rather the psychoanalyst will have to rediscover at 
each step a symbol functioning in the particular case which 
he is considering. If each being is a totality, it is not con- 
ceivable that there can exist elementary symbolic relation- 
ships (e.g., the faeces = gold, or a pincushion = the breast) 
which preserve a constant meaning in all cases; that is, which 
remain unaltered when they pass from one meaningful en- 
semble to another ensemble. Futhermore the psychoanalyst 
will never lose sight of the fact that the choice is living 
and consequently can be revoked by the subject who is 
being studied. We have shown in the precedmg chapter the 
importance of the instant, which represents abrupt changes 
in orientation and the assuming of a new position in the 
face of an unalterable past. From this moment on, we must 
always be ready to consider that symbols change meaning 
and to abandon the symbol used hitherto. Thus existential 
psychoanalysis will have to be completely flexible and .adapt 
itself to the slightest observable changes in the subject. Our 
concern here is to understand what is individual and often 
even instantaneous. The method which has served for one 
subject will not necessarily be suitable to use for another 
subject or for the same subject at a later period. 

Precisely because the goal of the inquiry must be to dis- 
cover a choice and not a state, the investigator must recall 
on every occasion that his object is not a datum buried in 
the darkness of the unconscious but a free, conscious deter- 
mination — ^which is not even resident in consciousness, but 
which is one with this consciousness itself. Empirical psycho- 
analysis, to the extent that its method is better than its prin- 
ciples, is often in sight of an existential discovery, but it 
always stops part way. When it thus approaches the funda- 
mental choice, the resistance of the subject collapses suddenly 
and he recognizes the image of himself which is presented 
to him as if he were seeing himself in a mirror. This in- 
voluntary testimony of the subject is precious for the psycho- 
^alyst; he sees there the sign that he has reached his goal; 
he can pass on from the investigation proper to the cure. 



733 


DOING AND HAVING 

But nothing in his principles or in his initial postulates 
permits him to understand or to utilize this testimony. Where 
could he get any such right? If the complex is really uncon- 
scious— that is, if there is a barrier separating the sign from 
the thing signified— how could the subject recognize it? 
Does the unconscious complex recognize itself? But haven’t 
we been told that it lacks understanding? And if of ne- 
cessity we granted to it the faculty of understanding the 
signs, would this not be to make of it by the same token a 
conscious unconscious? What is understanding if not to be 
conscious of what is understood? Shall we say on the other 
hand that it is the subject as conscious who recognizes the 
image presented? But how could he compare it with his 
true state since that is out of reach and since he has never 
had any knowledge of it? At most he will be able to 
judge that the psychoanalytic explanation of his case is 
a probable hypothesis, which derives its probability from 
the number of behavior patterns which it explains. His 
relation to this interpretation is that of a third party, that 
of the psychoanalyst himself; he has no privileged position. 
And if he believes in the probability of the psychoanalytic 
hypothesis, is this simple belief, which lives in the limits 
of his consciousness, able' to effect the breakdown of the 
barriers which dam up the unconscious tendencies? The' 
psychoanalyst doubtless had some obscure picture of an 
abrupt coincidence of conscious and unconscious. But he 
has removed all methods of conceiving of this coincidence 
in any positive sense. 

Still, the enlightenment of the subject is a fact. There 
IS an intuition here which is accompanied by evidence. The 
subject guided .by the psychoanalyst does more and better 
than to give his agreement to an hypothesis; he touches it, 
he sees what it is. This is truly understandable only if the 
subject has never ceased being conscious of his deep ten- 
dencies; better yet, only if these drives are not distinguished 
from his conscious self. In this case as we have seen, the 
traditional psychoanalytic interpretation does not cause him 
to attain consciousness of what he is; it causes him to attain 
knowledge of what he is. It is existential psychoanalysis 

then which claims the final intuition of the subject as deci- 
sive. 

This comparison allows us to understand better what an 
existential psychoanalysis must be if it is entitled to exist. 



734 ' ’ BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

It is a method destined to bring to light, in a strictly ob- 
jective form, the subjective choice by which each living 
person makes himself a person; that is, makes known to him- 
self what he is. Since what the method seeks is a choice of be- 
ing at the same time as a being, it must reduce particular 
behavior patterns to fundamental relations — not of sexual- 
ity or of the will to power, but of being — ^which are expressed 
in this behavior. It is then guided from the start toward 
a comprehension of being and must not assign itself any 
other goal than to discover being and the mode of being 
of the being confronting this being. It is forbidden to 
stop before attaining this goal. It will utilize the compre- 
hension of being which characterizes the investigator inas- 
much as he is himself a human reality; and as it seeks to 
detach being from its symbolic expressions, it will have to 
rediscover each time on the basis of a comparative study 
of acts and attitudes, a symbol destined to decipher them. 
Its criterion of success will be the number of facts which 
its hypothesis permits it to explain and to unify as well as 
the self-evident intuition of the irreducibility of the end 
attained. To this criterion will be added in all cases where 
it is possible, the decisive testimony of the subject. The re- 
sults thus achieved — that is, the ultimate ends of the individ- 
ual — can then become the object of a classification, and it 
is by the comparison of these results that we will be able 
to establish general considerations about_ human reality as 
an empirical choice of its own ends. The behavior studied 
by this psychoanalysis will include not only dreams, failures, 
obsessions, and neuroses, but also and especially the thoughts 
of waking life, successfully adjusted acts, style, etc. This 
psychoanalysis has not yet found its Freud. At most we can 
find the foreshadowing of it in certain particularly successful 
biographies. We hope to be able to attempt elsewhere two 
examples in relation to Flaubert and Dostoevsky. But it mat-, 
ters little to us whether it now exists; the important thing 
is that it is possible. 


n. “DOING” AND “HAVING”: POSSESSION 

The information which ontology can furnish concern- 
ing behavior patterns and desire must serve as the basic prin- 
ciples of existential psychoanalysis. This does not mean that 



doing>and having- ^ 

to. is an over-all pattern o£ "‘h'el^TwuS 
men;, it. means ^that J“““beoaSe Sch desire-the 

emerge during the study SY jesire of creating 

desire of f °/^s^®fS®human reality. As I have s^own 
Sere,= the knowledge of ^,^j“^nirsi£fflcanoe! 

te^rroS^iogy 

S Taboi desire, since desire is the bemg of human- 

'*’Sle is a lack of being. As such h is directly 
by the being of which it is a lack. This being, as we 
said, is the in-itself-for-itself, consciousness become s^stance 
substance become the cause of itself, the Man-God. s 
being of human reality is originally not a substance but a 
lived relation. The limiting terms of this relation are first the 
original In-itself, fixed in its contingency and its facticity, its 
essential characteristic being that it is, that it exists; and sec- 
ond the In-itself-for-itself or value, which exists as the ideal 
of the contingent In-itself and which is characterized as be- 
yond all contingency and all existence. Man is neither the one 
nor the other of these beings, for strictly speaking, we 
should never say of him that he is at all. He is what he is riot 
and he is not what he is; he is the nihilation of the contin- 
gent In-itself in so far as the self of this nihilation is its flight 
ahead toward the In-itself as self-cause. Human reality is the 
pure effort to become God without there being any given sub- 
stratum for that effort, without there being anything which 
so endeavors. Desire expresses this endeavor. 

Nevertheless desire is not defined solely in relation to the 
In-itself-as-self-cause. It is also relative to a brute, concrete 
existent which we commonly call the object of the desire. 
This object may be now a slice of bread, now an automobile, 
now a woman, now an object not yet realized and yet defined 
— as when the artist desires to create a work of art. Thus by 
its very structure desire expresses a man’s relation to one' or 
several objects in the world; it is one of the aspects of Being- 

^Esquisse d'une thdorie des Smotlons. 1939 . 



736 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ia-the-world. From this point of view we see first that this 
relation is not of a unique type. It is only by a sort of abbre- 
viation that we speak of “the desire of something.” Actually 
a thousand empirical examples show that we desire to possess 
this object or to do that thing or to be someone. If I desire 
this picture, it means that I desire to buy it, to appropriate it 
for myself. If I desire to write a book, to go for a walk, it 
means that I desire to “do” this book, to “do” this walk. 
If I dress up, it is because I desire to be well-groomed. I train 
myself in order to be a scientist, etc. Thus from the outset, 
the three big categories of concrete human existence appear to- 
ns in their original relation: to do, to have, to be.^ 

It is easy to see, however, that the desire to do is not irre- 
ducible. One does (=makes) an object in order to enter into 
a certain relation with it. This new relation can be immediate- 
ly reducible to having. For example, I cut a cane from a 
branch of a tree (I rfo a cane out of a branch) in order to 
have this cane. The “doing” is reduced to a mode of having. 
This is the most common example. But it can also happen 
that my activity does not appear on the surface as reducible. 
It can appear gratuitous as in the case of scientific research, or 
sport, or aesthetic creation. Yet in these various examples do- 
ing is still not irreducible. If I create a picture, a drama, a 
melody, it is in order that I may be at the origin of a con- 
crete existence. This existence interests me only to the degree 
that the bond of creation which I establish between it and 
me gives to me a particular right of ownership over it. It is 
not enough that a certain picture which I have in mind 
should exist; it is necessary as well that it exist through me.^ 
Evidently in one sense the ideal would be that I should 
sustain the picture in being by a sort, of continuous creation 
and that consequently it should be mine as though by a per- 
petually renewed emanation. But in another sense it must be 
radically distinct from myself — in order that it may be mine 
but not me. Here as in the Cartesian theory of substances, 
there is danger that the being of the created object may be 
reabsorbed in my being because of lack of independence and 
objectivity; hence it must of necessity exist also in itself, must 
perpetually renew its existence by itself. Consequently my 
work appears to me as a continuous creation but fixed in the 
in-itself; it carries indefinitely my “mark”; that is, it is for 

■‘Tr. The reader will recall that as stated earher the French word 
means both “do” and “make.” 



doing and having 737 

an indefinite period “my” thought. Every work of art is a 
thought, an “idea”; its characteristics are plainly ideal to the 
extent that it is nothing _but a. meaning. But on the other 
hand, this meaning, this thought which is in one sense per- 
petually active as if I were perpetually forming it, as if a mind 
were conceiving it without respite — a mind which would' be 
my mind— this thought sustains itself alone in being;^ it by no 
means ceases to be active when I am not actually thinking it. 

I stand fo it then in the double relation of the consciousness 
which conceives it and the consciousness which encounters 
it. It is precisely this double relation which I express by say- 
ing that it is mine. We shall see the meaning of it when we 
have defined precisely the significance of the category “to 
have.” It is in order to enter into this double relation in the 
synthesis of appropriation that I create my work. In fact it is 
tliis synthesis of self and not-self (the intimacy and trans- 
lucency> of thought on the one hand and the opacity and 
indifference of the in-itself on the other) that I ana aiming at 
and which will establish my ownership of the work. In this 
sense it is not only strictly artistic works which I appropriate 
in this manner. This cane which I have cut from the branch 
is also destined to belong to me in this double relation: first 
as an object for everyday use, which is at my disposition and 
which I possess as I possess my clothes or my books, and sec- 
ond as my own work. Thus people who like to surround them- 
selves with everyday objects which they themselves have 
made, are enjoying subtleties of appropriation. They unite in a 
single object and in- one syncretism the appropriation by 
enjoyment and the appropriation by creation. We find this 
same^ uniting into a single project everywhere from artistic 
creation to the cigarette which “is better when I roll it my- 
self.” Later we shall meet this project in connection with a 
special type of ownership which stands as the degradation of 
It— luxury— for we shall see that luxury is distinguished not 
as a quality of the object possessed but as a quality of 
possession. ^ ^ 

Knowing also — as we showed in the introduction to Part 
Four— is a form of appropriation. That is, why scientific re- 
search IS nothing other than an effort to appropriate. The 
truth discovered, like the work of art, is my knowledge- it is 
me noema of a thought which is discovered only when I 
lorm the thought and which consequently appears in a certain 
way as maintained in existence by ite. It is tooug“me TaH 



738 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

facet of the world is revealed; it is to me that it reveals itself. 
In this sense I am creator and possessor, not that I consider 
the aspect of being which I discover as a pure representa- 
tion, but on the contrary, because this aspect, although it is 
revealed only by me, exists profoundly and really. I can say 
only that I manifest it in the sense that Gide tells us that “we 
always ought to manifest.” But I find again an independence 
analogous to that of the work of art in the character of the 
truth of my thought; that is, in its objectivity. This thought 
which I form and which derives its existence from me pursues 
at the same time its own independent existence to the extent 
that it is thought by everybody. It is doubly “I”: it is the 
world revealing itself to me and it is “I” in relation to others, 
I forming my thought with the mind of others. At the same 
time it is doubly closed against me: it is the being which I 
am not (inasmuch as it reveals itself to me), and since it is 
thought by all from the moment of its appearance, it is a 
thought devoted to anonymity. This synthesis of self and not- 
self can be expressed here by the term “mine.” 

In addition the idea of discovery, of revelation, includes an 
idea of appropriative enjoyment. What is seen is possessed; to 
see is to deflower. If we examine the comparisons ordinarily 
used to express the relation between the knower and the 
known, we see that many of them are represented as being 
a kind of violation by sight. The unknown object is given as 
immaculate, as virgin, comparable to a whiteness. It has not 
yet “delivered up” its secret; man has not yet “snatched” its 
secret away from it. All these images insist that the object is 
ignorant of the investigations and the instruments aimed at it; 
it is unconscious of being known; it goes about its business 
without noticing the glance which spies on it, like a woman 
whom a passerby catches unaware at her bath. Figures of 
speech, sometimes vague and sometimes more precise, like that 
of the “unviolated depths” of nature suggest the idea of sexual 
intercourse more plainly. We speak of snatching away her 
veils from nature, of unveiling her (c/. Schiller’s Veiled Image 
of Sdis). Every investigation implies the idea of a nudity 
which one brings out into the open by clearing away the ob- 
stacles which cover it, just as Actaeon clears away the 
branches so that he can have a better view of Diana at her 
bath. More than this, knowledge is a hunt. Bacon called it 
the hunt of Pan. The scientist is the hunter who surprises a 
white nudity and who violates by looking at it. Thus the to- 



739 


DOING AND HAVUsTG 

tality of these images reveals something which we shall call 
ihQ Actaeon complex. ' 

-By taking this idea of the hunt as a guidmg thread, we shall 
discover another symbol of appropriation, perhaps still more 
primitive; a person hunts for the sake of eating. Curiosity m 
an animal is always either sexual or alimentary. To know is to 
devour with the eyes.® In fact we can note here, so far as 
knowledge through the senses is concerned, a process the 
reverse of that which was discovered in connection with the 
work of art. We remarked that the work of art is like a fixed 
emanation of the min d. The mind is continually creating it 
and" yet' it stands alone and indifferent in relation to that 
creation. This same relation exists in the act of knowing, but 
its opposite is not excluded. In knowing, consciousness at- 
tracts the object to itself and incorporates it in itself. Knowl- 
edge is assimilation. The writings of French epistemology 
swarm with alimentary metaphors (absorption, digestion, as- 
similation). -There is a movement of dissolution which passes 
from the object to the knowing subject. The known^ is trans- 
formed into me; it becomes my thought and thereby consents 
to receive its existence from me alone. But this movement of 
dissolution is fixed by the fact that the known remains in the 
same place, indefinitely absorbed, devoured, and yet indefi- 
nitely intact, wholly digested and yet wholly outside, as 
indigestible as a stone. For naive imaginations the symbol of 
the “digested indigestible” is very important; for example, 
the stone in the stomach of the ostrich or Jonah in the 
stomach of the whale. The symbol represents the dream of a 
non-destructive assimilation. It is an unhappy fact — as Hegel 
noted— -that desire destroys its object. In this sense, he said, 
desire is the desire of devouring. In reaction against this 
dialectical necessity, the For-itself dreams of an object which 
may be entirely assimilated by me, which would be me, with- 
out dissolving into me but still keeping the • structure of the 
in-itself; for what I desire exactly is this object; and if I eat 

It, I do not have it any more, I find nothing remaining except 
myself. ^ 

^’piis impossible synthesis of assimilation and an assimilated 
which maintains its integrity has deep-rooted connections 
with basic sexual drives. The idea of “carnal possession” offers 

“ttag' He wm'ts to taste what 

oai, with TJI bS; 



740 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

us the irritating but seductive figure of a body perpetually 
possessed and perpetually new, on which possession leaves no 
trace. This is deeply symbolized in the quality of “smooth” or 
“polished.” What is smooth can be taken and felt but remains 
no less impenetrable, does not give way in the least beneath 
the appropriative caress — it is like water. This is the reason 
why erotic descriptions insist on the smooth whiteness of a 
woman’s body. Smooth — it is what re-fofms itself under the 
caress, as water re-forms itself in its passage over the stone 
which has pierced it. At the same time, as we have seen 
earlier, the lover’s dream is to identify the beloved object 
with himself and still preserve for it its own individuality; 
let the Other become me without ceasing to be the Other. It 
is at this point that we encounter the similarity to scientific 
research: the known object, like the stone in the stomach of 
the ostrich, is entirely within me, assimilated, transformed into 
myself, and it is entirely me; but at the same time it is im- 
penetrable, untransformable, entirely smooth, with the indif- 
ferent nudity of a body which is beloved and caressed in vain. 
It remains outside; to know it is to devour it yet without con- 
suming it. We see here how the sexual and alimentary cur- 
rents mingle and interpenetrate in order to constitute the 
Actaeon complex and the Jonah complex; we can see the 
digestive and sensual roots which are reunited to give birth to 
the desire of knowing. Knowledge is at one and the same time 
a penetration and a superficial caress, a digestion and the 
contemplation from afar of an object which will never lose 
its form, the production of a thought by a continuous crea- 
tion and the establishment of the total objective indepen- 
dence of that thought. The known object is my thought as a 
thing. This is precisely what I profoundly desire when I un- 
dertake my research — to apprehend my thought as a thing 
and the thing as my thought The syncretic relation which pro- 
vides the basis for the ensemble of such diverse tendencies 
can be only a relation of appropriation. That is why the desire 
to know, no matter how disinterested it may appear, is a rela- 
tion of appropriation. To know is one of the forms which can 
be assumed by to have. 

There remains one type of activity which we willingly ad- 
mit is entirely gratuitous : the activity of play and the “drives” 
which* relate back to it. Can we discover an appropriate drive 
in sport? To be sure, it must be noted first that play as con- 
trasted with the spirit of seriousness appears to be the least 



741 

doing and having 

, rwf reality. The serious 

possessive attitude; world and attributing more 

W involves starting from the wjr 

reality to the world to the degree 

serious man confers t®mty chance that 

to which he belongs to the • chance that it is found at 

materialism is serious; f.voritf SSe of the revolu- 

all times and places as the serious They come 

•tionary. TOs is because —00^ are 

to know themselves first m ^ ^orld. In this 

oppresses them, and they ancient adver- 

one respect they are ^smem themselves and 

saries, the possessors, who also come to Know^^ ^ 

appreciate themselves in terms world* it coaeu- 

Thus all serious thought is thickened y > world, 

lates; it is a disntissal of hum- f-or oMhe wor d^ 

The serious man is of the world nossibUitv 

himself. He does not even imagine any looser P ^ ^ 
of getting out of the world, for he has given to hiinselt me 

type of existence of the rock, j odious ^hat, 

opacity of being-in-the-midst-of-the-world. 

the serious man at bottom is hiding from ® ^ ^ 

sciousness,of his freedom; he is m bad faith and h^ bad 
faith aims at presenting himself to his own ^ ^ . 

sequence; everything is a consequence for him, 
never any beginning. That is why he is so concerne 
the consequences of his acts. Marx proposed the origmal dog- 
ma of the serious when he asserted the priority of o jec ov 
subject. Man is serious when he takes himself for ^ ° * 

. Play, like Kierkegaard’s irony, releases subjectivity. What 
is play indeed if not an activity of which man is the first ori- 
gin, for which man himself sets the rules, and which h^ no 
consequences except according to the rules posited? As 
soon as a man apprehends himself as free and wishes to use 
his freedom, a freedom, by the way, which could, just as well 
be his anguish, then his activity is play. The first principle of 
play is man himself; through it he escapes his natural nature; 
he himself sets the value and rules for his acts and consents to 
play only according to the rules which he himself has es- 
tablished and defined. As a result, there is in a sense “little 
reality” in the world. It' might appear then that when a man 
is playing, bent on discovering himself as free in his very 
action, he' certainly could not be concerned with possessing 
a being in the world. His goal, which he aims at through 



742 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

sports or pantomime or games, is to attain himself as a certain 
being, precisely the being which is in question in his being. 

The point of these remarks, however, is not to show us 
that in play the desire to do is irreducible. On the contrary 
we must conclude that the desire to do is here reduced to a 
certain desire to be. The act is not its own goal for itself; 
neither does its explicit end represent its goal and its pro- 
found meaning; but the function of the act is to make mani- 
fest and to present to itself the absolute freedom which is the 
very being of the person. This particular type of project, 
which has freedom for its foundation and its goal, deserves a 
special study. It is radically different from all others in that 
it aims at a radically different type of being. It would be 
necessary to explain in full detail its relations with the project 
of being-God, which has appeared to us as the deep-seated 
structure of human reality. But such a study can not be made 
here; it belongs rather to an Ethics and it supposes that there 
has been a preliminary deJBnition of nature and the role of 
purifying reflection (our descriptions have hitherto aimed 
only at accessory reflection) ; it supposes in addition taking a 
position which can be moral only in the face of values which 
haunt the For-itself. Nevertheless the fact remains that the de- 
sire to play is fundamentally the desire to be. 

Thus the three categories “to be,” “to do,” and “to have” 
are reduced here as everywhere to two; “to do” is purely tran- 
sitional. Ultimately a desire can be only the desire to be or 
the desire to have. On the other hand, it is seldom that play 
is pure of all appropriative tendency, I am passing over the 
desire of achieving a good performance or of beating a rec- 
ord which can act as a stimulant for the sportsman; I am not 
even speaking of the desire “to have” a handsome body and 
harmonious muscles, which springs from the desire of appro- 
priating objectively to myself my own being-for-others. These 
desires do not always enter in and besides they are not funda- 
mental. But there is always in sport 'an appropriative com- 
ponent. In reality sport is a free transformation of the worldly 
environment into the supporting element of the action. This 
fact makes it creative like art. The environment may be a .field 
of snow, an Alpine slope. To see it is already to possess it. 
In itself it is already apprehended by sight as a symbol of 
being.® It represents pure exteriority, radical spatiality; its un- 
differentiation, its monotony, and its whiteness manifest the 

® See Section III. 


743 


DOING AND HAVING 

absolute nudity of substance; it is the in-itself which is only 
in-itself, the being of the phenomenon, which being is mam- 
fested suddenly outside all phenomena. At the same time its 
solid immobility expresses the permanence and the objective 
resistance of the In-itself, its opacity and its impenetrability. 
Yet this first intuitive enjoyment can not suffice me. That 
pure in-itself, comparable to the absolute, intelligible plenum 
of Cartesian extension, fascinates me as the pure appearance 
of the not-me. What I wish precisely- is that this in-itse^ 
might be a sort of emanation of myself while still remaining in 
itself. This is the meaning even of the snowmen and snowballs 
which children make; the goal is to “do something out of 
snow”; that is, to impose on it a form which adheres so deep- 
ly to the matter that the matter appears to exist for the sake of 
the form. But if I approach, if I want to establish an appro- 
priative contact with the field of snow, everything is 
changed. Its scale of being is modified; it exists bit by bit in- 
stead of existing in vast spaces; ' stains, brush, and crevices 
come to individualize each square inch. At the same time 
its solidity melts into water. I sink into the snow up to my 
knees; if I pick some up with my hands, it turns to liquid 
in my fingers; it runs off; there is nothing left of it. The in- 
itself is transformed into nothingness. My dream of appro- 
priating the snow vanishes at the same moment. Moreover 1 
do not know what to do with this snow which I have just 
come to see close at hand. I can not get hold of the field; I 
can not even reconstitute it as that substantial total which 
offered itself to my eyes and which has abruptly, doubly col- 
lapsed. 

To ski means not only to enable me to make rapid move- 
ments and to acquire a technical skill, nor is it merely to 
play^ by increasing according to my whim the speed or diffi- 
culties of the course; it is also to enable me to possess this 
field of snow. At present I am doing something to i/.^Xhat 
means that by my very activity as a skier, I am changing the 
matter and meaning of the snow. From the fact that now in 
my course it appears to me as a slope to go down, it finds 
again a continuity and a unity which it had lost. It is at the 
moment connective tissue. It is included between two limit- 
ing terms; it unites the point of departure with the point of 
arrival. Since in the descent I do not consider it in itself, bit 
by bit, but am always fixing on a point to be reached beyond 
the , position which I now occupy, it does not collapse into 



744 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

an infinity of individual details but is traversed toward the 
point which I assign myself. This traversal^ is not only zp. 
activity of movement; it is also and especially a synthetic 
activity of organization and connection; I spread the skiing 
field before me in the same way that the geometrician, accord- 
ing to Kant, can apprehend a straight line only by drawing 
one. Furthermore this organization is marginal and not focal; 
it is not for itself and in itself that the field of snow is uni- 
fied; the goal, posited and clearly perceived, the object of my 
attention is the spot at the edge of the field where I shall 
arrive. The snowy space is massed underneath implicitly; its 
cohesion is that of the blank space understood in the interior 
of a circumference, for example, when I look at the black 
line of the circle without paying explicit attention to its sur- 
face. And precisely because I maintain it marginal, implicit, 
and understood, it adapts itself to me, I have it well in hand; 
I pass beyond it toward its end just as a man hanging a 
tapestry passes beyond the hamm er which he uses, toward 
its end, which is to nail an arras on the wall. 

No appropriation can be more complete than this instru- 
mental appropriation; the synthetic activity of appropriation 
is here a technical activity of utilization. The upsurge of the 
snow is the matter of my act in the same way that the upswing 
of the hammer is the pure fulfillment of the h amm ering. At 
the same time I have chosen a certain point of view ia 
order to apprehend this snowy slope: this point of view is a 
determined speed, which emanates from me, which I can in- 
crease or diminish as I like; through it the field traversed is 
constituted as a definite object, entirely distinct from what it 
would be at another speed. The speed organizes the ensembles 
at will: a specific object does or does not form a part of a 
particular group according to whether I have or have not 
taken a particular speed. (Think, for example, of Provence 
seen “on foot,” “by car,” “by train,” “by bicycle.” It offers 
as many different aspects according to whether or not Beziers 
is one hour, a morning’s trip, or two days distant from Nar- 
bonne: that is, according to whether Narbonne is isolated 
and posited for itself with its environs or whether it con- 
stitutes a coherent group with Beziers and Sete, for. example. 
In this last case Narbonne’s relation to the sea is directly 
accessible to intuition; in the other it is denied; it can form 
the object only of a pure concept.) It is I myself then who 
give form to the field of snow by the free speed which I give 



745 


doing and having 


myself. But at the same time I am acting upon my ma . 
The speed is not limited to imposing a form on a matter given 
from the outside; it creates its matter. The snow, which sank 
under my weight when I walked, which melted into water 
when I tried to pick it up, solidifies suddenly under the ac- 
tion of my speed;' it supports me. It is- not that I have lost 
sight "Of its lightness, its non-substantiality, its perpetual 
evanescence. Quite the contrary. It is precisely that lightness, 
that evanescence, that secret liquidity which hold me up; that 
is, which condense and melt in order to support me. This 
is because I hold a special relation of appropriation with the 
snow: sliding. This relation we will study later in detail. 
But at the moment we can grasp its essential meaning. We 
think of sliding as remaining, on the surface. This is inexact; 
to be sure, 1 only skim the surface, and this skimming in it- 
self is worth a whole study. Nevertheless I realize a synthesis 
which has depth. I realize that the bed of snow organizes it- 
self in its lowest depths in order to hold me up; the sliding 
is action at a distance; At assures my mastery over the material 
without my needing' to plunge into that material and engulf 
myself in it in order to overcome it. To slide is the opposite 
of taking root. The root is already half assimilated into the 
earth which nourishes it; it is a living concretion of the earth; 
it can utilize the earth only by making itself earth; that is, 
by submitting itself, in a sense, to the matter which it wishes 


to utilize. Sliding, on the contrary, realizes a material unity in 
depth without penetrating farther than the surface; it is 
like the dreaded master who does not need to insist nor to 
raise his voice in order to be obeyed. An admirable picture of 
power. From this comes that famous advice: “Slide, mortals, 
don’t bear down!” This does not mean “Stay on the surface, 
don’t go deeply into things,” but on the contrary, “Realize 
syntheses in depth without compromising yourself.” 

Sliding is appropriation precisely because the synthesis of - 
support realized by the speed is valid only for the slider and 
during the actual time when he is sliding. The solidity of the 
snow is effective only for me, is sensible only to me; it is a 
secret which the snow releases to me alone and which is al- 
ready no longer true behind my back. Sliding realizes a strictly 
individual relation with matter, an historical relation* the 
matter reassembles itself and solidifies in order to hold me up 
and It falls back exhausted and scattered behind me Thus bv 
my passage I have realized that which is unique for me. The 



746 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

ideal for sliding then is a sliding which does not leave any 
trace. It is sliding on water with a rowboat or motor boat or 
especially with water skis which, though recently invented, 
represent from this point of view the ideal limit of aquatic 
sports. Sliding on snow is already less perfect; there is a trace 
behind me by which I am compromised, however light it may 
be. Sliding on ice, which scratches the ice and finds a matter 
already organi 2 ed, is very inferior, and if people continue fo 
do it despite all- this, it is for other reasons. Hence that slight 
disappointment which always sekes us when we see behind us 
the imprints which our skis have left on the snow. How much 
better it would be if the snow re-formed itself as we passed 
over it! Besides when we let ourselves slide down the slope, we 
are accustomed to the illusion of not making any mark; we 
ask the snow to behave like that water which secretly it is. 
Thus the sliding appears as identical with a continuous crea- 
tion. The speed is comparable to consciousness and here sym- 
bolizes consciousness.'^ While it exists, it effects in the material 
the birth of a deep quality which lives only so long as the 
speed exists, a sort of reassembling which conquers its indif- 
ferent exteriority and which falls back like a blade of grass 
behind the moving slider. The info rmin g unification and syn- 
thetic condensation of the field of snow, which masses itself 
into an instrumental organization, which is utilized, like the 
hammer or the anvil, and which docilely adapts itself to an 
action which understands it and fulfills it; a continued and 
creative action on the very matter of the snow; the solidifica- 
tion of the snowy mass by the sliding; the similarity of the 
snow to the water which gives support, docile and without 
memory, or to the naked body of the woman, which the caress ^ 
leaves intact and troubled in its inmost depths — such is the 
action of the skier on the real. But at the same time the snow 
remains impenetrable and out of reach; in one sense the action 
of the skier only develops its potentialities. The skier makes it 
produce what it can produce; the homogeneous, solid matter 
releases for him a solidity and homogeneity only through the 
act of the sportsman, but this solidity and this homogeneity 
dwell as properties enclosed in the matter. This synthesis of 
self and not-self which the sportsman’s action here realizes is 
expressed, as in the case of speculative knowledge .and the 
work of art, by the afiSrmation of the right of the skier over 
the snow. It is my field of snow; I have traversed it a hundred 
^ We have seen in Part Three the relation of motion to the for-itself. 



DOING AND HAVING 747 

times, a hundred times I have through my speed effected the 
birth of this force of condensation and support; it is mine. 
To this aspect of appropriation through sport, there 
must be added another — a difficulty overcome. It is more 
generally understood, and we shall scarcely insist on it here. 
Before descending this snowy slope, I must climb up it. 
And this ascent has offered to me another aspect of the snow 
— resistance. I have realized this resistance through my 
fatigue, and I have been able to measure at each instant the 
progress of my victory. Here the snow is identical with 
the Other, and the common expressions “to overcome,” 
“to conquer,” “to master,” etc. indicate suflSciently that it 
is a matter of establishing between me and the snow the 
relation of master to slave. This aspect of appropriation 
which we find in the ascent exists also in swimming, in 
an obstacle course, etc. The peak on which a flag is planted 
is a peak which has been appropriated. Thus a principal 
aspect of sport — and in particular of open air sports — is 
the conquest of these enormous masses of water,' of earth, 
and of air, which seem a priori indomitable and unutiliz- 
able; and in each case it is a question of possessing not the 
element for itself, but the type of existence in-itself which 
is expressed by means of this element; it is the homogeneity 
of substance which we wish to possess in the form of- 
snow; it is the impenetrability of the in-itself and its non- 
temporal permanence which we wish to appropriate in^ the ' 
form of the earth or of the rock, etc. Art, science, play 
are activities of appropriation, either wholly or in part, and 
what &ey want to appropriate beyond the concrete object 
of their quest is being itself, the absolute being of the in- 
itself. 

^ Thus ontology teaches us that desire is originally a de- 
sire of being and that it is characterized as the free lack of 
being. But it teaches us also that desire is a relation with 
a concrete existent in the midst of the world and that this 
existent is conceived as a type of in-itself; it teaches us that 
the relation of the for-itself to this desired in-itself is appro- 
priation. We are, then, in the presence of a double deter- 
mination of desire: on the one hand, desire is determined 
as a desire to be a certain being, .which is the in-itself-for- 
itself and whose existence is ideal; on the other hand, desire 
is determined in the vast majority of cases as a relation 
with a contingent and concrete in-itself which it has the 


748 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

project of appropriating.^ Does one of these determinations ’ 
dominate the other? Are the two characteristics compatible? 
Existential psychoanalysis can be assured of its principles 
only if ontology has given a preliminary definition of the 
relation of these two beings — ^the concrete and contingent 
in-itself or object of the desire, and the in-itself-for-itself 
or ideal of the desire — and if it has made explicit the relation 
which unites appropriation, as a tji^e of relation to the in- 
itself, to being, as a type of relation to the in-itself-for-itself. 
This is what we must attempt at present. 

What is meant by “to appropriate”? Or if you prefer, 
what do we understand by possessing an object? We have 
seen the reducibility of the category “to do,” which allows 
us to see in it at one time “to be” and at another “to have.” 

Is it the same with the category “to have”? 

It is evident that in a great number of cases, to possess an 
object is to be able to use it. However, I am not satisfied 
with this definition. In this cafe I use this plate and this 
glass, yet they are not mine. I can not “use” that picture 
which hangs on my wall, and yet it belongs to me. The 
right which I have in certain cases to destroy what I pos- 
sess is no more decisive. It would be purely abstract to define 
ownership by this right, and furthermore in a society with 
a “planned economy” an owner can possess his factory with- 
out having the right to close it; in imperial Rome the mas- 
ter possessed his slave but did not have the right to put 
him to death. Besides what is meant here by the right to 
destroy, the right to use? I can see that this right refers me 
to the social sphere and that ownership seems to be defined 
within the compass of life in society. But I see also that the 
right is purely negative and is limited to preventing another 
from destroying or using what belongs to me. Of course 
we could try to define ownership as a social function. But 
first of all, although society confers in fact the right to 
possess according to certain rules, it does not follow that 
it creat^ the relation of appropriation. At the very most it 
makes it legal. If ownership is to be elevated to the rank 
of the sacred, it must first of all exist as a relation sponta- 
neously established between the forritself and the concrete in- 
itself. E we can imagine the future existence of a more just 
collective organization, where individual possession will 

8 Except where there is simply a desire to be— the desire -to be happy, to 
be strong, etc. 



. DOING AND HAVING ' 749 

cease to be protected and sanctified at least within certain 
limits— this does not mean that the appropriative tie will 
cease to, exist; it can remain indeed by virtue of a private 
relation of men to things. Thus in primitive societies where 
the matrimonial bond is not yet a legal one and where 
hereditary descent is still matrilineal, the sexual tie exists 
at the very least as a kind of concubinage. It is neces- 
sary then to distinguish between possession and the right 
to possess. For the same reason I must reject any definition 
of the type which Proudhon gives — such as “ownership is 
theft”— for it begs the question. It is possible of course 
for private property to be the product of theft and for &e 
holding of this property to have for its result the robbing 
of another. But whatever may be its’ origin and its results, 
ownership remains no less capable of description and defi- 
nition in itself. The thief considers himself the owner of the 
money which he has stolen. Our problem then includes 
describing the precise relation of the thief to the stolen 
. goods as well as the relation of the lawful owner to proper- 
ty “honestly acquired.” 

If I consider the object which I possess, I see that the 
quality of being possessed does not indicate a purely exter- 
nal denomination marking the object’s external relation to 
me; on the contrary, this quality affects its very depths; 
It appears to me and it appears to others as making a part 
of the . object’s being. This is why primitive societies 
say of certain individuals that they are “possessed”; the 
“possessed” are thought of as belonging to. .. . This is 
also the significance of primitive funeral ceremonies where 
the dead are buried with the objects which belong to them. 
The rational explanation, “so that they can use the objects,” 
is evidently after the event. It is more probable that at the 
period when this kind of custom appeared spontaneously, 
no explanation seemed to be required. The objects had 
the specific quality belonging to the deceased. They formed 
a whole with him; there was no more question of burying 
me dead 'man without his usual objects than of burying 
him without one of his legs. The corpse, the cup from 
which the dead man drank, the knife which he used make 
' ^person. The custom of burning widows in 

2ry well be included under this princ’ 
rn possessed; the dead man takes 
death. In' the eyes of the co 



750 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

law she is dead; the burning is only to help her' pass from 
this legal death to death in fact. Objects which can not 
be put in the grave are haunted. A ghost is only the con- 
crete materialization of the idea that the house and furnish- 
ings “are possessed.” To say that a house is haunted means 
that neither money nor effort will efface the metaphysical, 
absolute fact of its possession by a former occupant. It is 
true that the ghosts which haunt ancestral castles are de- 
graded Lares. But what are these Lares if not layers of 
possession which have been deposited one by one on the 
walls and furnishings of the house? The very expression which 
designates the relation of the object to its owner indicates 
sufficiently the deep penetration of the appropriation; to be 
possessed means to be for someone (etre a .. .). This means 
that the possessed object is touched in its being. We have 
seen moreover that the destruction of the possessor involves 
the destruction of the right of the possessed and inversely 
the survival of the possessed involves the survival of the 
right of the possessor. The bond of possession is an inter- 
nal bond of being. I meet the possessor in and through 
the object which he possesses. This is evidently the explana- 
tion of the importance of relics; and we mean by this not 
only religious relics, but also and especially the totality of 
the property of a famous man in which we try to rediscover 
him, the souvenirs of the beloved dead which seem to 
“perpetuate” his memory. (Consider, for example, the Vic- 
tor Hugo Museum, or the “objects which belonged” to 
Balzac, to Flaubert.) 

This internal, ontological bond between the possessed and 
the possessor (which customs like branding have often 
attempted to materialize) can not be explained by a “realistic” 
theory of appropriation. If we are right in defining realism 
as a doctrine which makes subject and object two indepen- 
dent substances possessing existence for themselves and by 
themselves, then a realistic theory can no more account 
for appropriation than it can for knowledge, which is one of 
the forms of appropriation; both remain external relations 
uniting temporarily subject and object. But we have seen that 
a substantial existence must be attributed to the object 
known. It is the same with ownership in general; the possessed 
object exists in itself, is defined by permanence, non-tem- 
porality, a sufficiency of being, in a word by substantiality. 
Therefore we must put U nselbstandigkeit on the side of the 



doing and having 


751 


possessing subject A substance can^no^app^opriate anote 

substance, and if we app because originally the 

quality of ‘‘being possessed,^^^ !^ t^rin-itself! which is 
internal relation of the for insufficiency of being 

ownership, derives its orig object possessed is 

“ J bv f Tt S appropSn^ any more 

not really affected by t ^owledge. It remains 

than the object known is aff V ig ^ human ■ 

untouched (except in cases w e P quality on the 

being, like a slave or ideally 

part o£ the possessed does not affect its me^mg ‘a y 
in the least; in a word, its meaning is to reflect this posses 

Sion to tllC for-itsclf* i+a/l intSl*** 

H the possessor and the possesgd ate 
nal relation based on the insufficiency oJ ’’cmg m 
for-itselt. we must tty to determine ffie ^ 

ing of the dyad which they form. In possessor 

tion is synthetic and effects the unification 
and the possessed. This means that the , 

possessed constitute ideally a unique reality. ^ 

to be united with the object possessed m 
appropriation; to wish to possess is to wish o , , 

to an object in this relation. Thus the desire of a particular 
object is not the simple desire of this object, it is^ e ^ esn 
to be united with the object in an internal relation, m me 
mode, of constituting with it the unity “possessor-possessed. 
The desire to have is at bottom reducible to the desire to e 
related to a certain object in a certain relation of being. 

In determining this relation, observations made earlier 
on the behavior of the scientist, the artist, ^d the sports- 
man will be very useful to us. We discovered in the behavior 
of each one a certain appropriate attitude, and the appro- 
priation in each case was marked by the fact that the object 
appeared simultaneously to be a kind of subjective emana- 
tion of ourselves and yet to remain in an indifferently exter- 
nal relation with us. The “mine” appeared to us then as 
a relation of being intermediate between the absolute 
interiority of the me and the absolute exteriority of the not- 
me. There is within the same syncretism a self becoming 
not-self and a not-self becoming self. But we must describe 
this relation more carefully. In the project of possession we 
meet a for-itself which is “Vnselbstandig" separated by a 
nothingness from the' possibility which it ' is. This pos- 


752 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS . 

sibility is the possibility of appropriating the object. We 
meet in addition a value which haunts the for-itself and 
which stands as the ideal indication of the total being which 
would be realized by the union in identity of the possible 
and the for-itself which is its possible; I' mean here the 
being which would be realized if I were in the indissoluble 
unity of identity — ^myself and my property. Thus appro- 
priation would be a relation of being between a for- 
itself and a concrete in-itself, and this relation would be 
haunted by the ideal indication of an identification between 
this for-itself and the in-itself which is possessed. 

To possess means to have for myself; that is, to be the 
unique end of the existence of the object If possession is 
entirely and concretely given, the possessor is the raison 
d’etre of the possessed object I possess this pen; that means 
this pen exists for me, has been made for me. Moreover 
originally it is I who make for myself the object which I 
want to possess. My bow and arrows — ^that means the ob- 
jects which I have made for myself. Division of labor can 
dim this original relation but can not make it disappear. 
Luxury is a degradation of it; in the primitive form of lux- 
ury I possess an object which I have had made {done) for 
myself by people belonging to me (slaves, servants bom in 
the house). Luxury therefore is the form of ownership 
closest to primitive ownership; it is this which next to 
ownership itself throws the most light on the relation of 
creation which originally constitutes appropriation. This re- 
lation in a society where the division of labor is pushed to 
the limit is hidden but not suppressed. The object which 
I possess is one which I have bought. Money represents 
my strength; it is less a possession in itself than an instru- 
ment for possessing.^ That is why except in most unusual 
cases of avarice, money is effaced before its possibility 
for purchase; it is evanescent, it is made to unveil the 
object, the concrete thing; money has only a transitive being. 
But to me it appears as a creative force: to buy an object 
is a symbolic act which amounts to creating the object. That 
is why money is synonymous with power, not only because it 
is in fact capable of procuring for us what we desire, but espe- 
cially because it represents the effectiveness of my desire as 
such. Precisely because it is transcended toward the thing, sur- 
passed, and^ simply implied, it represents my magical bond 
With the object. Money suppresses the technical connection 



doing and having 

=a: atr™ r iS.“S 

lishes a bond of appropriation between 

the total collection of objects m the world. By means of 

money desire as such is already informer and creator. 

Thus through a continuous degradation, the bond oi crea- 
tion is maintained' between subject and object. To have is 
first to create.' And the bond of ownership which is. estab- 
lished then is a bond of continuous creation^ the object 
possessed is inserted by me into the total form of my envi- 
ronment; its existence is determined by my situation and by 
its integration in that same situation. My lamp is not only 
that electric bulb, that shade, that wrought iron st^nd; 
it is a certain power of lighting this desk, these books, this 
table; it is. a certain luminous nuance of my work at night 
in connection with my habits 'of reading or writing late; 
it is animated, colored, defined by the use which I make 
of it; it is that use and exists only through it. If isolated 
from my desk, from my work, and placed in a lot of objects 
on the floor of a salesroom, my lamp is radically extin- 
guished; it is no longer my lamp; instead merely a member of 
the class of lamps, it has returned to its original matter. 
Thus I am responsible for the existence of my possessions 
in the human order. Through ownership I raise them up 
to a certain type of. functional being; and my simple life 
appears to me as creative exactly because by its continuity 
it perpetuates the quality of being possessed in each of the 
objects in my possession. I draw the collection of my sur- 
roundings into being along with myself. If they are taken 

from me, they die as my arm would die if it were severed 
from me. 

But the original, radical relation of creation is a relation of 
emanation, and the difficulties encountered by the Cartesian 
theory of substance are there to help us discover this relation, 
nvfif ^ me— if by creating we mean to bring 

existence. The tragedy of the absolute 
existed, would be the impossibility of getting 
self Wh whatever he created could be only him-' 

1 creation derive any objectivity and in- 

wn ot .nania could close it off from my presence, but in 



754 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

order for this same inertia to function, I must sustain it in ex- 
istence by a continuous creation. Thus to the extent that I 
appear to myself as creating objects by the sole relation of 
appropriation, these objects are myself. The pen and the pipe, 
the clothing, the desl . the house — are myself. The totality of 
my possessions reflects the totality of my being. I am what I 
have. It is I mvself which I touch in tois cup, in this trin- 
ket. This mountaii' which I climb is myself to the extent that 
I conquer it; and when I am at its summit, which I have 
“achieved” at the cost of this same effort, when I attain this 
magnificent view of the valley the surrounding peaks, 
then I am the view; the panorama is myself dilated to the 
horizon, for it exists only through me, only for me. 

But creation is an evanescent concept which can exist 
only through it' movement. If we stop it, it disappears. At the 
extreme limits of its acceptance, it is annihilated; either I find 
only my pure subj< ctivity or else I encounter a naked, indiffer- 
ent materiality which no longer has any relation to me. Crea- 
tion can be conceived and maintained only as a continued 
transition from one term to the other. As the object rises up 
in my world, it must simultaneously be wholly me and wholly 
independent of me. This is what we believe that we are realiz- 
ing in possession The possessed object as possessed is a con- 
tinuous creation but still it remains there, it exists by itself; 
it is in-itself. If 1 turn away from it, it does not thereby cease 
to exist; if I go away, it represents me in my desk, in my 
room, in this place in the world. From the start it is impen- 
etrable. >This pen is entirely myself, at the very point at which 
I no longer even distinguish it from the act of writing, which 
is my act. And yet. on the other hand, it is intact; my owner- 
ship does not change it; there is only an ideal relation between 
it and me. In a sense I enjoy my ownership ifT surpass it to- 
ward use, but if I wish to contemplate it, the bond of possession 
is effaced, I no longer understand what it means to possess, 
^e pipe there on the table is independent, indifferent. I pick 
it up, I feel it. 1 contemplate it so as to realize this appropri- 
ation; but just because these gestures are meant to give me 
the enjoyment of this appropriation, they miss their mark. I 
have merely an inert, wooden stem between my fingers. It is 
only when I pass beyond my objects toward a goal, when I 
utilize them, that I can enjoy their possession. 

T^us the relation of continuous creation encloses withm it 
as its implicit contradiction the absolute, in-itself indepen- 



755 


DOING AND HAVING 

dence of the objects created. Possession is a magical relation; 
l am these objects which I possess, but outside, so to speak 
facing myself; I create them as independent of me; what 1 
possess is mine outside of me, outside all subjectivity, as an 
in-itself which- escapes me at each instant and whose creation 
at each instant I perpetuate. But precisely because I am always 
somewhere outside of myself, as an incompleteness which 
makes its being known to itself by what it is not, now when I 
possess, 1 transfer myself to the object possessed. In the 
tion of possession the dominant term is the object possessed, 
without it I am nothing save a nothingness which possesses, 
nothing other than pure and simple possession, an incom- 
pleteness, an insufficiency, whose sufficiency and completion 
are there in that object. In possession, I am my own founda- 
tion in so far , as I exist in an in-itself. In so far as possession 
is a continuous creation, I apprehend the possessed object as 
founded, by' me in its being; On the other hand, in so far as 
creation is emanation, this object is reabsorbed in me, it is 
only myself. Finally, in so far as it is originally in itself, it is 
not-me, it is myself facing myself, objective, in itself, perma- 
■ nent, impenetrable, existing in relation to me in the relation of 
exteriority, of -indifference. Thus I am the foundation for my- 
self in so far as I exist as an indifferent in-itself in relation to 
myself. But this is precisely the project of the in-itself -for-itself. 
For this ideal being is defined as an in-itself which, for-itself,- 
would be its own foundation, or as a for-itself whose original 
project would not be a mode of being, but a being precisely 
the being-in-itself which it is. We see that appropriation is 
nothing save the symbol of the ideal of the for-itself or value. 
The dyad, for-itself possessing and in-itself possessed, is the 
same as that being which is in order to possess itself and 
whose possession is in its own creation — God. Thus the pos- 
sessor aims at enjoying his being-in-itself, his being-outside. 
Through possession I recover an object-being identical with 
my being-for-others. Consequently the Other can not sur- 
prise me; the being which he wishes to bring into the world, 
which is myself-for-the-Other — this being I already enjoy 
possessing. Thus possession is 1% addition a defense against 
others. What is mine is myself in a non-subjective form inas- 
much as I am its free foundation. 

We can not insist too strongly on the fact that this relation 
is symbolic and ideal My original desire of being my own 
foundation for myself is never satisfied through appropriation 



•756 ' BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

any more than Freud’s patient satisfies his Oedipus complex 
when he dreams that a soldier kills the Czar (i.e., his father). 
This is why ownership appears to the owner simultaneously as 
something given at one stroke in the eternal and as requiring 
an infinite time to be realized. No particular act of utilization 
really realizes the enjoyment of full possession; but it refers to 
other appropriative acts, each one of which has the value of an 
incantation. To possess a bicycle is to be able first to look 
at it, then to touch it. But touching is revealed as being in- 
sufiicient; what is necessary is to be able to get on the bicycle 
and take a ride. But this gratuitous ride is likewise insufficient; 
it would be necessary to use the bicycle to go on some 
errands. And this refers us to longer uses and more complete, 
to long trips across France. But these trips themselves disinte- 
grate into a thousand appropriative behavior patterns, each 
one of which refers to others. Finally as one could foresee, 
handing over a bank-note is enough to make the bicycle be- 
long to me, but my entire life is needed to realize this pos- 
session. In acquiring the object, I perceive that possession is 
an enterprise which death always renders still unachieved. 
Now we can understand why; it is because it is impossible 
to realize the relation symbolized by appropriation. In itself 
appropriation contains nothing concrete. It is not a real 
activity (such as eating, drinking, sleeping) which could serve 
in addition as a symbol for a particular desire. It exists, on 
the contrary, only as a symbol; it is its symbolism which 
gives it its meaning, its coherence, its existence. There can be 
found in it no positive enjoyment outside its symbolic 
value; it is only the indication of a supreme enjoyment of pos- 
session (that of the being which would be its own founda- 
tion), which is always beyond all the appropriative conduct 
meant to realize it. 

This is precisely why the recognition that it is impossible 
to possess an object involves for the for-itself a violent 
urge to destroy it. To destroy is to reabsorb into myself; it is 
to enter along with the being-in-itself of the destroyed object 
into a relation as profound as that of creation. The flames 
which burn the farm which I myself have set on fire, gradu- 
ally effect the fusion of the farm with myself. In annihilating 
it I am changing it into myself. Suddenly I rediscover the 
relation of being found in creation, but in reverse; I am the 
foundation of the barn which is burning; I am this barn since 
I am destroying its being. Destruction realizes appropriation 



757 


doing and having 

nerhaos more keenly than creation does, for the object de- 
Loyed is no longer there to show itself impenetoable. It has 
? onA tiiPL cnfficiencv of being of the in-itself 



and translucency of the nothingness which I am, smce it no 
longer -exists. This glass which I have broken and which 
“was” on this table is there still, but as an absolute trans- 
parency. I see all beings superimposed. This is what movie 
producers have attempted to render by overprinting the nlin. 
The destroyed object resembles a consciousness although it 
has the irreparability of the in-itself. At the same time it is 
positively mine because the mere fact that I have to be what 
I was keeps the destroyed object from being annihilated. I 
re-create it by re-creating myself; thus to destroy is to re- 
create by assuming oneself as solely responsible for the being 
of what existed for all. ' ' 

Destruction then is to be given a, place among appropriative 
behaviors. Moreover many kinds of appropriative conduct 
have a destructive structure along with other structures. To 
utilize is to use. In making use of my bicycle, I use it up — 
•wear it out; that is, continuous appropriative creation is 
marked by a partial destruction. This wear .can cause distress 
for strictly practical reasons, but in the majority of cases it 
brings a secret joy, almost like the joy of possession; this is 
because it is coming from us — ^we are consuming. It should 
be noted that the word “consume” holds the double meaning 
of an appropriative destruction and an alimentary enjoyment. 
To consume is to annihilate and it is to eat; it is to destroy 
by incorporating into oneself. If I ride on my bicycle, I can 
be annoyed at wearing out its tires because it is diEBcult to 
find others to replace them; but the image of enjoyment which 
my body invokes is that of a destructive appropriation, of a 
cre^ion-destruction.” The- bicycle gliding along, carrying 
me, by its very movement is created and made mine; but this 
creation is deeply imprinted on the object by the light, con- 
jmued wear which is impressed on it and which is like the 
rand on &e slave. The object is mine because it is I who 

of my ^ reverse side 

These remarks will enable us to understand better the 

“worfmn/ Sn 

“dressed ^ anything new;" what is new is 

ed up because it does not belong to anybody. 


758 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

meaning of certain feelings or behavior ordinarily considered 
as irreducible; for example, generosity. Actually the gift is a 
primitive form of destruction. We know for example that the 
potlatch involves the destruction of enormous quantities of 
merchandise. These destructions are forbidden to the Other; 
the gifts enchain him. On this level it is indifferent whether 
the object is destroyed or given to another; in any case the 
potlatch is destruction and enchaining of the Other. I destroy 
the object by giving it away as well as by annihilating it; I 
suppress in it the quality of being mine, which constituted 
it to the depths of its being; I remove it from my sight; I 
constitute it — ^in relation to my table, to my room — as 
absent; I alone shall preserve for it the ghostly, transparent 
being of past objects, because I am the one through whom 
beings pursue an honorary existence after their annihilation. 
Thus generosity is above all a destructive function. The craze 
for giving which sometimes seizes certain people is first and 
foremost a craze to destroy; it is equivalent to an attitude of 
madness, a “love” which accompanies the shattering objects. 
But the craze to destroy which is at the bottom of generosity 
is nothing else than a craze to possess. All which I abandon, 
all which I give, I enjoy in a higher manner through the fact 
that I give it away; giving is a keen, brief enjoyment, almost 
sexual. To give is to enjoy possessively the object which one 
gives; it is a destructive-appropriative contact. But at the same 
time the gift casts a spell over the recipient; it obliges him to 
re-create, to maintain in being by a continuous creation this 
bit of myself which I no longer want, which I have just pos- 
sessed up to its annihilation, and which finally remains only 
as an image. To give is to enslave. That aspect of the gift does 
not interest us here, for it concerns primarily our relations 
with others. What we wish to emphasize is that generosity is 
not.in'educible; to give is to appropriate by destruction while 
utilizing this destruction to enslave another. Generosity then 
K a feeling structured by the existence of the Other and in- 
dicates a preference for appropriation by destruction. In this 
way it leads us toward nothingness still rnore than toward the 
in-itself (we have here a nothingness of in-itself which is 
evidently itself in-itself but which as nothingness can sym- 
bolize with the being which is its own nothingness). If then 
existential psychoanalysis encounters evidence of generosity 
in a subject, it must search further for his original project and 
ask why the subject has chosen to appropriate by destruction 



; DOING AND HAVING 759 

rather than by creation. The answer to this question wilL re- 
veal that original relation to being which constitutes the per- 

son who is being studied. ^ ^ ^ xt. -j i 

These observations aim only at bringing to light the ideal 
character of the appropriative tie and the symbolic function 
of all appropriative conduct. It is necessary to add that the 
symbol is not deciphered by the subject himself. It has not 
been prepared by a symbolic process in an unconscious but 
comes from the very structure of being-in-the-world. We 
have seen in the chapter devoted to transcendence that the 
order of instruments in the world is the result of my project- 
ing into the in-itself the image of my possibilities — ^that is, 
of what I am — but that I could never decipher this worldly 
image since it would require nothing less than reflective 
scissiparity to enable me to consider myself in the pattern of 
an object. Thus since the circuit of selfness is non-thetic 
and consequently the identification of what I am remains 
non-thematic, this “being-in-itself* of myself which the 
world refers to as me is necessarily hidden from my 
knowledge. I can only adapt myself to it in and -through 
the approximative action which gives it birth. Consequently 
to possess does not mean to know that one holds with the 
object possessed a relation identified as creation-destruction; 
rather to possess means to be in this relation or better yet 
to be this relation. The possessed object has for us an 
immediately apprehensible quality which transforms it entire- 
ly — ^the quality of being mine — but this quality is in itself 
strictly undecipherable; it reveals itself in and through action. 
It makes clear that it has ^ particular meaning, but from 
the moment that we want to withdraw a little in relation to 
the object and to contemplate it, the quality vanishes without 
revealing its deeper structure and its meaning. This with- 
drawal indeed is itself destructive of the appropriative con- 
nection. An instant earlier I was engaged in an ideal total- 
ity, and precisely because I was engaged in my being, I could 
not know it; an instant later the totality has been broken and 
I can not discover the meaning of it in the disconnected 
fragments which formerly composed it. This can be observed 
in that contemplative experience called depersonalization 
which certain patients have in spite of efforts to resist it. 
We are forced then to have recourse to existential psycho- 
analysis to reveal in each particular case the meaning of the 



760 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

appropriative synthesis for which we have just determined 
the general, abstract meaning by ontology. 

It remains to determine in general the meaning of the 
object possessed. This investigation should complete our 
knowledge of the appropriative project. What then is it 
which we seek to appropriate? 

In the first place it is easy to see abstractly that we origi- 
nally aim at possessing not so much the mode of being of an 
object as the actual being of this particular object. In fact 
it is as a concrete representative of being-in-itself that I 
desire to appropriate it; that is, to apprehend that ideally I 
am the foundation of its being in so far as it is a part of 
myself and on the other hand to apprehend that empirically 
the appropriated object is never valid in itself alone nor for 
its individual use. No particular appropriation has any mean- 
ing outside its indefinite extensions; the pen which I possess 
is the same as all other pens; it is the class of pens which I 
possess in it. But in addition I possess in it the possibility 
of writing, of tracing with certain characteristic forms and 
color (for I combine the instrument itself and the ink which 
I use in it). These characteristic forms and color with their 
meaning are condensed in the pen as well as the paper, its 
special resistance, its odor, etc. With all possession there 
is made the crystallizing synthesis which Stendhal has de- 
scribed for the one case of love. Each possessed object which 
raises itself on the foundation of the world manifests the 
entire world, just as a beloved woman manifests the sky, 
the shore, the sea which surrounded her when she appeared. 
To appropriate this object is then to appropriate the world 
symbolically. Each one can recognize it by referring to his' 
own experience: for myself, I shall cite a personal example, 
not to prove the point but to guide the reader in his inquiry. 

Some years ago I brought myself to the decision not 
to smoke anymore. The struggle was hard, and in truth, I 
did not care so much for the taste of the tobacco which I 
was going to lose, as for the meaning of the act of smoking. 
A complete crystallization had been formed. I used to smoke 
at the theater, in the morning while working, in the eve- 
ning after dinner, and it seemed to me that in giving up 
smoking I was going to strip the theater of its interest, the 
evening meal of its savor, the morning work of its fresh ani- 
mation. Whatever unexpected happening was going to meet 
my eye, it seemed to me that it was fundamentally impover- 



761 


" ' ' DOING AND HAVING 

ished from the moment that I could not welcome it while 

smoking. To-be-capable-of-being-met-by-me-smoking: such 

was the concrete quality which had been spread over every- - 
thing. It seemed to me that I was going to snatch it away ^ 
from everything and that in the midst of this universal impov- 
erishment, life was scarcely worth the effort. But to smoke 
is an appropriative, destructive action. Tobacco is a symbol 
of “appropriated” being, since it is destroyed in the rhythm 
of my breathing, in a mode of “continuous destruction,’ 
since it passes into me and its change in myself is manifest- 
ed symbolically by the transformation of the consumed solid 
into smoke. The connection between the landscape seen 
while I was smoking and this little crematory sacrifice was 
such that as we have just seen, the tobacco symbolized the 
landscape. This means then that the act of destructively 
appropriating the tobacco w^ the symbolic equivalent of , 
destructively appropriating the entire world. Across the tobac- 
co which I was smoking was the world which was burn- 
ing, which was going up in smoke, which was being reab- 
sorbed into vapor so as to re-enter into me. In order to main- 
tain my decision not to smoke, I had to realize a sort of 
decrystallization; that is, without exactly accountmg to myself 
for what I was doing, I reduced the tobacco to being noth- 
ing but itself — an herb which bums. I cut its symbolic ties 
with the world; I persuaded myself that I was not taking 
anything away from the play at the theater, from the land- 
scape, from the book which I was reading, if I considered 
then^ without my pipe; that is, I rebuilt my possession of 
these objects in modes other than that sacrificial ceremony. 
As soon as I was persuaded of this, my regret was reduced 
to a very small matter; I deplored the thought of not 
perceiving the odor of the smoke, the warmth of the bowl 
between my fingers and so forth. But suddenly my regret 
was disarmed and quite bearable. 

pius^ what fundamentally we desire to appropriate in an 
object is its being and it is the world. These two ends of 
appropriation are in reality only one. I search behind the 
phenomenon to possess the being of the phenomenon. But. 
this bemg, as we have seen, is very different from the phe- 
nomenon of being; it is being-in-itself, and. not only the 
heing of a particular thing. It is not because there is here 
a passage to the universal but rather the being considered 
m Its concrete nudity becomes suddenly the being of the 



762 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

totality. Thus the relation of possession appears to us 
clearly: to possess is to wish to possess the world across a 
particular object. And as possession is defined as the effort 
to apprehend ourselves as the foundation of a being in so 
far as it is ourselves ideally, every possessive project aims at 
constituting the For-itself as the foundation of the world 
or a concrete totality of the in-itself, and this totality is, as 
totality, the for-itself itself existing in the mode of the in- 
itself. To-be-in-the-world is to form the project of possess- 
ing the world; that is, to apprehend the total world as that 
which is lacking to the for-itself in order that it may become 
in-itself-for-itself. It is to be engaged in a totality which is 
precisely the ideal or value or totalized totality and which 
would be ideally constituted by the fusion of the for-itself 
as a detotal ized totality which has to be what it is, with the 
world, as the totality of the in-itself which is what it is. 

It must be understood of course that the project of the 
for-itself is not to establish a being of reason, that is a 
being which the for-itself would first conceive — ^form and 
matter — and then endow with existence. Such a being ac- 
tually would' he a pure abstraction, a universal; its con- 
ception could not be prior to being-in-the-world; on the 
contrary its conception would presuppose being-in-the- 
world as it supposes the pre-ontological comprehension of 
a being which is eminently concrete and present at the start, 
which is the “there” of the first being-there of the for- 
itself; that is the being of the world. The for-itself does not 
exist so as first to think a universal and then determine it- 
self in terms of concepts. It is its choice and its choice can 
not be abstract without making the very being of the for-itself 
abstract. The being of the for-itself is an individual venture, 
and the choice must be an individual choice of a concrete 
being. This applies, as we have seen, to the situation in gen- 
eral. The choice of the for-itself is always a choice of a con- 
crete situation in its incomparable uniqueness. But it is 
true as well for the ontological meaning of this choice. 
When we say that the for-itself is a project of being, we do 
not mean that the being-in-itself which it forms the project 
of being is conceived by the for-itself as a structure com- 
mon to all existents of a certain type; its project is in no way 
a conception, as we have seen. That which it forms the 
project of being appears to it as an eminently concrete total- 
ity; it is this particular being. Of course we can foresee in 



doing and having ' ^63 

tliis project the possibUities of a universalizing develop- 
ment; but it is in the same way as we say of a love^at he 
loves all women or all womanMnd m one woman. The for- 
itself has the project of being the foundation of this con- 
crete being, which, as we have just seen, can not be con- 
ceived— tor the very reason that it is concrete; neither can 
it be imagined, for the imaginary is nothingness and this 
being is eminently being. It must exist; that is, it ™-^st 
be encountered, but this encounter is identical with the 
choice which ,the for-itself makes. The for-itself is an en- 
countered-choice; that is, it is defined as a choice of found- 
ing the being which it encounters. This means that the for-itself 
as an individual enterprise is a choice of this world, 
as an individual totality of being; it does not surpass it to- 
ward a logical universal but toward a new concrete 
“state” of the same world, in which being would be an in- 
itself founded by the for-itself; that is, it surpasses it toward 
a concrete-being-beyond-the-concrete-existing-being. Thus 

being-in-the-world is a project of possessing this world, 
and the value which haunts the for-itself is the concrete 
indication of an individual being constituted by the syn- 
thetic function of this for-itself and this world. Being, in 
fact, whatever it may be, wherever it may come from and in 
whatever mode we may consider it, whether it is- in-itself ““or 
for-itself or the impossible ideal of in-itself-for-itself, is in 
its original contingency an individual venture. 

Now we can define the relations which unite the two 
categories, to be and to have. We have seen that desire 
can be originally either the desire to be or the desire to have. 
But the desire to have is not irreducible. While the desire 
to be bears directly on the for-itself and has the project of 
conferring on it without intermediary the dignity of in-itself- 
for-itself, the desire to have aims at the for-itself on, in, 
and through the world. It is by the appropriation of the 
world that the project to have aims at realizing the same 
value as the desire to be. That is why these desires, which 
can be distinguished by analysis, are in reality, inseparable. 
It is impossible to find a desire to be which is not accom- 
panied by a desire to have, and conversely. Fundamentally we 
have to do with two ways of looking toward a single goal, 
or if you prefer, with two interpretations of the same fun- 
damental situation, the one tending to confer being on 
the For-itself without detour, the other establishing the cir- 



764 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


cuit of selfness; that is, inserting the world between the for- 
itself and its being. As for the original situation, it is the 
lack of being which I am; that is, which I make myself 
be. But the being of which I make myself a lack is strict- 
ly individual and concrete; it is the being which exists 
already and in the midst of which I- arise as being its lack. 
Thus the very nothingness which I am is individual and con- 
crete, as being this nihilation and not any other. 

Every for-itself is a free choice; each of its acts — the 
most insignificant as well as the most weighty — expresses 
this choice and emanates from it. This is what we have called 
our freedom. We have now grasped the meaning of this 
choice; it is a choice of being, either directly or by the appro- 
priation of the world, or rather by both at once. Thus my 
freedom is a choice of being God and' all my acts, all 
my projects translate this choice and reflect it in a thousand 
and one ways, for there is an infinity of ways of being and 
of ways of having. The goal of existential psychoanalysis is 
to rediscover through these empirical, concrete projects the 
original way in which each man has chosen his being. 
It remains to explain, someone will say, why- I choose to 
possess the world through this particular object rather than 
another. We shall reply that here we see the peculiar char- 
acter of freedom. 

Yet the object itself is not irreducible. Tn it we aim at its 
being through its mode of being or quality. Quality — particu- 
larly a material quality like the fluidity of water or the density 
of a stone — is a mode of being and so can only pre- 
sent being in one certain way. What we choose is a certain 
way in which being reveals itself and lets itself be possessed. 
The yellow and red, the taste of a tomato, or the wrinkled 
softness of split peas are by no means irreducible givens-ac- 
cording to our view. They translate symbolically to our 
perception a certain way which being has of giving itself, 
and we react by disgust or desire, according to how we see 
being spring forth in one way or another from their surface. 
Existential psychoanalysis must bring out the ontological 
meaning of qualities.. It is only thus — and not by considera- 
tions of sexuality — that we can explain, for example, cer- 
tain constants in poetic “imaginations” (Rimbaud's “geolog- 
ical, Poe’s fluidity of water) or simply the tastes of each 
one, those famous tastes which we are forbidden to discuss 
without taking into account that they symbolize in their 



doing AND HAVING.- 


765 


way a whole 

and that hence comes q ^ext proce'dure 

o£ the man who has made of exis- 

then is to sketch m ou i making suggestions for 

tential psychoanalysis, ^ of a taste for 

bitterness, and the rest. 

in QUALITY AS A REVELATION OF 

being 

WHAT we must do is to attempt ^ psychoanalysis of thin^^ 

M. Bachelard has tried this and shown much talent m h s 
last book, Water and Dreams. There is great promise m this 
work; in particular the author has made a real ‘discovery 
his “material imagination.” Yet in truth this term 
tion does not suit us and neither does that attempt to loo 
behind things and their gelatinous, solid, or fluid matter, 
for the “images” which we project there. Perception,^ as 1 
have shown elsewhere,^® has nothing in common with im^- 
ination; on the contrary each strictly excludes the other, lo 
perceive does not mean to assemble images by means oi sen 
sations; this thesis, originating with the association theory in 
psychology, must be banished entirely. Consequently psycho- 
analysis will not look for images but rather will^ seek to 
' explain the meaning which really belongs to things. Of 
' course the “human” .meaning of sticky, of slimy, etc. does 
not belong to the in-itself. But potentialities do not belong 
to it either, as we have seen, and yet it is these which con- 
stitute the world. Material meanings, the human sense of 
needles, snow, grained wood, of crowded, of greasy, etc., 
are as real as the world, neither more nor less, and to come 
into the world means to rise up in the midst of these mean- 
ings. But no doubt we have to do here with a simple differ- 
ence in terminology, M. Bachelard appears bolder and seems 
to reveal the basis of his thought when he speaks in his 
studies of psychoanalyzing plants or when he entitles one 
of his works The Psychoanalysis of Fire. Actually he is 


Vlmagmaire. 1940. 



766 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

applying not to the subject but to things a method of 
objective interpretation which does not suppose any previous 
reference to the subject. When for instance I wish to deter- 
mine the objective meaning of snow, I see, for example, 
that it melts at certain temperatures and that this melting of 
the snow is its death. Here we merely have to do with ob- 
jective confirmation. When I wish to determine the 
meaning of this melting, I must compare it to other ob- 
jects located in other regions of existence but equally ob- 
jective, equally transcendent — ^ideas, friendship, persons — 
concerning which I can also say that they melt. Money melts 
itt my hands. I am swimming and I melt in the water. Certain 
ideas — ^in the sense of socially objective meanings — ^“snow- 
ball” and others melt away.^^ We say, “How thin he has 
become! How he has melted away!” (Comme il a fondul) 
Doubtless I shall thus obtain a certain relation binding cer- 
tain forms of being to certain others. 

It is important to compare the melting snow to certain 
other more mysterious examples of melting. Take for exam- 
ple the content of certain old myths. The tailor in Grimm’s 
fairy tales takes a piece of cheese in his bands, pretends it 
is a stone, squeezes it so hard that the whey oozes out of it; 
his assistants believe that he has made a stone drip, timt 
he is extracting the liquid from it. Such a comparison in- 
forms us of a secret liquid quality in solids, in the sense in 
which Audiberti by a happy inspiration spoke of the se- 
cret blackness of milk. This liquidity which ought to be com- 
pared to the juice of fruit and to human blood — which is to 
man something like his own secret and vital liquidity — this 
liquidity refers us to a certain permanent possibility which the 
“granular compact” (designating a certain quality of the 
being of the pure in-itself) possesses of changing itself into 
homogeneous, undifferentiated fluidity {another quality of the , 
being of the pure in-itself). We apprehend here in its origin 
and with all its ontological significance the polarity of 
continuous and discontinuous, the feminine and masculine 
poles of the world, for which we shall subsequently see 
the dialectical development all the way to the quantum 
theory and wave mechanics. Thus we shall succeed in de- 
ciphering the secret meaning of the snow, which is an onto- 
logical meaning. 

But in aU this where is the relation to the subjective? To 
”We may recall also the “melting money” of Daladier. 


DOING AND HAVING 


767 


imagination? All we have done is to compare strictly objec- 
tive structures and to formulate the hypothesis which can 
unify and group these structures. That is why psychoanalysis 
depends here on the things themselves, not upon men. 
That is also why I should have less confidence than M. Bache- 
lard in resorting at this level to -the material imaginations 
of poets, whether Lautreamont, Rimbaud, or Poe. To be 
sure, it is fascinating to look for the “Bestiary of Lautrea- 
mont.” But actually if in this research we have returned to 
the subjective, we shall attain results truly significant only if we 
consider Lautreamont as an original and pure preference 
for animality and if we have first determined the objective 
meaning of animality.^^ fact if Lautreamont is what he pre- 
fers, it is necessary first to understand the nature of what he 
prefers. To be sure, we know well that he is going “to 
put” into the animal world something different and more 
than I put into it. But the subjective enrichments which 
inform us about Lautreamont are polarized by the objective 
structure of animality. This is why the existential psycho- 
analysis of Lautreamont supposes first an interpretation of 
the objective meaning of animal. Similarly I have thought 
for a long time of establishing a lapidary for Rimbaud. 
But what meaning would it have unless we had previously 
established the significance of the geological in general? 

It will be objected that a meaning presupposes man. We 
do not deny this. But man, being transcendence, establish- 
es the meaningful by his very coming into the world, and 
the meaningful because of the very structure of transcendence 
is a reference to other transcendents which can be inter- 
preted without recourse to the subjectivity which has estab- 
lished it. The potential energy of a body is an objective 
quality of that body which can be objectively calculated 
while taking into account unique objective circumstances. 
And yet this energy can come to dwell in a body only in a 
world whose appearance is a correlate of that of a for-itself. 
Similarly a rigorously objective psychoanalysis will discover 
that deeply engaged in the matter of things there are other 
potentialities which remain entirely transcendent even 
though they correspond to a still more fundamental choice 
of human reality, a choice of being. 

That brings us to the second point in which we differ with 
M. Bachelard. Certainly any psychoanalysis must have its 

“One aspect of this animality is exacUy what Scheler caUs vital values. 



768 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

orincioles a priori. In particular it must know what it is 
FS /or, ox how will it be able to find it? But since 
thfroal of its research can not itself be established by he 

psychoanalysis, without faUing into a 
L end must be the object of a postulate, either wt seek it 
in experience, or we establish it by means of some other 
discipLe. The Freudian libido is obviously a Post^ 

late; Adler’s will to power seems to fi®. 
generalization from empirical data-— and in ^^ct it is t 
vovy lack of method which allows him to disregard the ba^c 
principles of a psychoanalytic method. M. Bachelard seems 
to rely upon these predecessors; the postulate of sexuality 
seems to dominate his research; at other times we are referred 
to Death, to the trauma of birth, to the will to power. In short 
his psychoanalysis seems more sure of its method than ot its 
principles and doubtless will count on its results to enlighten 
it concerning the precise goal of its research. But this is 
to put the cart before the horse; consequences will never allow 
us to establish the principle, any more than the summation 
of finite modes will permit us to grasp substance. It appears 
to us therefore that we must here abandon these empirical 
principles or these postulates which would make man fl 
priori a sexuality or a will to power, and that we should 
establish the goal of psychoanalysis strictly from the stand- 
point of ontology. This is what we have just attempted 
We have seen that human reality, far from being capable 
of being described as libido or will to power, is a 
of being, either directly or through appropriation ot tne 
world. And we have seen — ^when the choice is 
through appropriation — that each thing is chosen m 
last analysis, not for its sexual potential but depending on 
the mode in which it renders being, depending on the man^ 
ner in which being springs forth from its surface. A psy 
choanalysis of things and of their matter ought above 
to be concerned with establishing the way in 
thing is the objective symbol of being and of the mla i 
of human reality to this being. We do not deny that 
should discover afterwards a whole sexual symbolisrn 
nature, but it is a secondary and reducible stratum, vwic 
supposes first a psychoanalysis of pre-sexual structures. l 
M. Bachelard’s study of water, which abounds in ingeniou 
and profound insights, will be for us a set of suggestions, 
a precious collection of materials which should now 


DOING AND HAVING 769 

utilized by a psychoanalysis which is aware of its own prin- 
ciples. 

What ontology can teach psychoanalysis is first of aU 
the true origin of the meanings of things and their true 
relation' to human reality. Ontology alone in fact can take its 
place on the plane of transcendence and from a single view- 
point apprehend being-in-the-world with its two terms, be- 
cause ontology alone has its place originally in the perspec- 
tive of the cogito. Once again the ideas of facticity and 
situation will enable us to understand the existential sym- 
bolism of things. We have seen that it is in theory possible 
but in practice impossible to distinguish facticity from the 
project which constitutes it in situation. This observation 
can be of use to us here; we have seen that there is no ne- 
cessity to hold that the “this” has any meaning whatever 
when considered in the indifferent exteriority of its being 
and independently from the upsurge of the for-itself. Ac- 
tually its quality, as we have seen, is nothing other than its 
being. The yellow of the lemon, we said, is not a sub- 
jective mode of apprehending the lemon; it is the lemon. 
We have shown also that the whole lemon extends through- 
out its qualities and that each one of the qualities is spread 
over the others; that is what we have correctly called “this.’’^^ 
Every quality of being is all of being; it is the presence 
of its absolute contingency; it is its indifferent irreduci- 
bility. Yet in Part Two we insisted on the inseparability 
of project and facticity in the single quality. “For in order 
for there to be quality, there must be being for a nothingness 
which by nature is not being. . . . Quality is the whole 
of being unveiling itself within the limitation of the there 
is." Thus from the beginning we could not attribute the 
meaning of a quality to being-in-itself, since the “there 
is” is already necessary; that is, the nihilating mediation 
of the for-itself must be there in order for qualities to be 
there. But it is easy to understand in view of these remarks 
that the meaning of quality in turn indicates something as 
a re-enforcement of “there is,” since we take it as our support 
in order to surpass the “there is” toward being as it is 
absolutely and in-itself. 

In each apprehension of quality, there is in this sense 
a metaphysical effort to escape from our condition so as to 
pierce through the shell of nothingness about the “there is” 

13 Part Two, Chapter Three, Section III. 



being and nothingness 

to penetrate to the P- 

apprehend quahty oriy^ f/r^olally thero\e£ore us; in 
o?‘ the Se ‘“s” is CMStituted which is the meaningful 

"ie! 

Mo^^being;" anTtbkt moChyl 

achieve and disclose by psychoanalysis. ‘ wrinkled? 

teal purport of yellow, of red, of polished, or wr^teor 

And a/ter these elementary quesUons, what is the ““'“P^y 
teal coefficient of lemon, of water, of od, 
analysis must resolve all these problems if it wants to undet 
stand someday why Pierre likes oranges nnd has a horr 
of water why he gladly eats tomatoes and refuses to eat 
beam why he vomits if he is forced to swallow oysters or 

We have shown also, however, the error '’^*uh 
make by believing that we “proi'=«” °'f “f "‘i™. 
tions on the thing, to illuminate it or color it First, m ot 
seen early in the discussion, a feelmg is not an mn 
position hnt an objective, transcending relaUon which h ^ 
as its object to learn what it is. But this is not al • 
explanation by projection, which is found ^^in such 
sayings as “A landscape is a spiritual state, ^ jj^y 

the question. Take for example that partic jt 

which we call “slimy.”^‘ Certainly ior the European aduK^^ 

signifies a host of human and a' 

can easily be reduced to relations of being. A 
smile, a. thought, a feeling can be slimy. The comm 
ion is that first I have experienced certain t>ehavior an 
tain moral attitudes which displease me and whicri x 
demn, and that in addition I have a sensory mtuitio ^ 
“slimy.” Afterward, says the ^eory, I should is 
connection between these feelings and slimines , 
slimy would function as a symbol of a whole clas 
feelings and attitudes. I would then have enriched th 

i*Tr. French visqueux. This at times comes closer to the ®"Slish ‘ sdckjj, ^ 
but I have consistently used the word “slimy” m 
figurative meaning of “slimy” appears to bo identical m bou 


DOING AND HAVING 771 

by projecting upon it my knowledge with respect to that 
human- category of behavior. 

But how are we to accept this explanation by projection? 
If we suppose that we have first grasped the feelings as pure 
psychic qualities, how will we be able to grasp their relation 
to the slimy? A feeling apprehended in its qualitative pu- 
rity will be able to reveal itself only as a certain purely 
unextended disposition, culpable because of its relation to 
certain values and certain consequences; in any case it will 
not “form an' image” unless the image has been given first. 
On the other hand if “slimy” is not originally charged with 
an affective meaning, if it is given only as a certain mate- 
rial quality, one does not see how it could ever be chosen as 
a symbolic representation of certain psychic unities. In a 
word, if we are to establish consciously and clearly a sym- 
bolic relation between sliminess and the sticky baseness of 
certain individuals, we must apprehend baseness already in 
sliminess and sliminess in certain baseness. Consequently 
the explanation by projection explains nothing since it 
takes for granted what it ought to explain. Furthermore 
even if it escaped this objection on principle, it would have 
to face another, drawn from experience and no less serious; 
the explanation by projection implies actually that the pro- 
jecting subject has arrived by experience and analysis at a 
certain knowledge of the structure and affect of the attitudes 
which he calls slimy. According to this concept the recourse 
to sliminess does not as knowledge enrich our experience 
of human baseness. At the very most it serves as a thematic 
unity, as a picturesque rubric for bits of knowledge already 
acquired. On the other hand, sliminess proper, considered in 
its isolated state, will appear to us harmful in practice (be-, 
cause slimy substances stick to the hands, and clothes, and 
because they stain), but sliminess then is not repugnant. 
In fact the disgust which it inspires can be explained only 
by the combination of this physical quality with certain 
moral^ qualities. There would have to be a kind of appren- 
ticeship for learning the symbolic value of “slimy.” But 
observation teaches us that even very young children show 
evidence of repulsion in the presence of something slimy, 
as if it were already combined with the psychic. We know 
also that from the time they know how to talk, they under- 
stand the .value of the words “soft,” “low,” etc., when ap- 
plied to the description of feelings. All this comes to pass 


772 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

as if we come to life in a universe where feelings and acts 
are all charged with something material, have a substantial j 
stuff, are really soft, dull, slimy, low, elevated, etc., and 
in which material substances have originally a psychic mean- 
ing which renders them repugnant, horrifying, alluring, etc. 

No explanation by projection or by analogy is acceptable 
here. To sum up, it is impossible to derive the value of j 
the psychic symbolism of “slimy” from the brute quality of ! 
the this and equally impossible to project the meaning of 1 
the this in terms of a knowledge of psychic attitudes. How 
then are we to conceive of this immense and universal sym- 
bolism which is translated by our repulsion, our hates, our 
sympathies, our attractions toward objects whose materiality 
must on principle remain non-meanmgful? To progress in 
this study it is necessary to abandon a certain number of 
postulates. In particular we must no longer postulate 
a priori that the attribution of sliminess to a particular 
feeling is only an image and not knowledge. We must also 
refuse to admit — until getting fuller information — that the 
psychic allows us to view the physical matter symbolically 
or that our experience with human baseness has any prior- 
ity over the apprehension of the “slimy” as meaningful. 

Let us return to the original project. It is a project of 
appropriation. It compels the slimy to reveal its being; since 
the upsurge of the for-itself into being is appropria- 
tive, the slimy when perceived is “a slimy to be possessed”; 
that is, the original bond between the slimy and » myself 
is that I form the project of being the foundation of its 
being, inasmuch as it is myself ideally. From the start then 
it appears as a possible “myself” to be established; from the 
start it has a psychic quality. This definitely does not mean 
that I endow it with a soul in the manner of primitive 
animism, nor with metaphysical virtues, but simply that 
even its materiality is revealed to me as having a psychic 
meaning — this psychic meaning, furthermore, is identical 
wi& the symbolic value which the slimy has in relation to 
faeing-in-itself. This appropriative way. of forcing the slimy 
to produce all its meanings can be considered as a form^ 
a priori, although it is a free project and although it 
is identified with the being of the for-itseif. In fact 
the appropriative mode does not depend originally on the 
mode of ' being of the slimy but only on its brute being 
there, on its pure encountered existence; it is like any other 


773 


DOING AND HAVING 


encounter since it is a simple project of appropriation, since 
it is not distinguished in any way from the pure there is 
and since it is, according to whether we consider it from 
one point of view or the other, either pure freedom or 
pure nothingness.' But it is precisely, within the limits of this 
appropriate project that the slimy reveals itself and 
develops* its siiminess. From the first appearance of the slimy, 
this si imin ess is already a response to a demand, already a 
bestowal of self; the slimy appears as already the outline 
of a fusion of the world with myself. What it teaches me 
about the world, that it is like a leech sucking me, is already 
a reply to a concrete questionj it responds with its very 
being, with its mode of being, with all its matter. The re- 
sponse which it gives is at the same time fully appropriate 
to the question and yet opaque and indecipherable, for it is 
rich with all its inexpressible materiality. It is clear inas- 
much as the reply is exactly appropriate; the slimy lets 
itself be apprehended as that which I lack; it lets itself be 
examined by an appropriative inquiry; it allows its siiminess 
to be revealed to this outline of appropriation. Yet it is opaque 
because if the meaningful form is evoked in the slimy by the 
for-itself, all its siiminess comes to succour and replenish it. 
We are referred then to a meaning which is full and dense, 
and this meaning releases for us jfirst being-in-itself in so far 
as the slimy is at the moment that which is manifesting the 
world, and second an outline of ourselves, in so far as the 
appropriation outlines something like a founding act on 
the part of the'slimy. 


What comes back to us then as an objective quality is a 
new nature which is neither material (and physical) / nor psy- 
chic, but which transcends the opposition of the psychic 
and the physical, by revealing itself to us as the ontological 
> expression of the entire world; that is, which offers itself as a 
rubric for classifying all the “thises” in the world, so that we 
have to deal with -material organizations or transcended tran- 
scendences. This means that the apprehension of the slimy as 
such has, by the same stroke, created for the m-itself of the 
world a particular mode of giving itself. In its own way it 
symbolizes being; that is, so long as the contact with the slimy 
endures, everything takes place for us as if siiminess were the 
meaning of the entire world or the unique mode of being of 
bemg-in-itself—m the same way as for the primitive clan of 
lizards all objects are lizards. 



774 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

What mode of being is symbolized by the slimy? I s®® &st 
it is the homogenei^ 

tiie appearance of ^ similar to itself, which 

:;TsSescap?s “f o^wSone can float, a being wto. 

L" withV' memory, which eternaliy ts « .mo 

itself on which one leaves no mark and which c(mld n 

a mik on us. a being which slides and 

slide which can be possessed by something slidmg ( y 

boat a motor boat, or water ski), and *Weh»^v“ 

because it rolls over us, a being 

infinite temporality because it is a PffP®t«al 

anything which changes, a being which best symbolizes 

this synthesis of eternity and f "'re 

of the for-itself as pure temporality and the m-itself a p 
eternity. But immediately the slimy reveals itself ^ ^ssenh^y 
ambiguous because its fluidity exists in slow moUon; toere is 
a sticky thickness in its liquidity; it represents m i 
dawning triumph of the solid over the 
a tendency of the indifferent in-itself, which is represented 
by the pure solid, to fix the liquidity, to absorb the for-itseJi 

which ought to dissolve it. , 

Slime is the agony of water. It presents itself as ^ 
nomenon in process of becoming; it does not have e p 
manence within change that water has but on the 5^ 

resents an accomplished break in a change of state. 1 ^ 
instability in the slimy discourages possession. Water is mor 
fleeting, but it can be possessed in its very flight s 
thing fleeing. The slimy flees with a heavy flight whicU 
the same relation to water as the unwieldy earthbound ig 
the chicken has to that of the hawk. Even this Ihgm , 
be possessed because it denies itself as flight. It is a 
almost a solid permanence. Nothing testifies more clear y 
ambiguous character as a “substance^ in between two ® ^ . 
than the slowness with which the slimy melts m^o i e • 
drop of water touching the surface of a large body of wa 
instantly transformed into the body of water; we do n 
the operation as buccal absorption, so to speak, of ®,. • _ 
of water by the body of water but rather' as a spun u 
and breaking down of the individuality of 
which is dissolved in the great All from which it had 
The symbol of the body of water seems to play a very imp 



DOING AND HAVING 775 

•V 

tant role in the construction of pantheistic systems; it reveals 
a particular type of relation of being to being. But if we con- 
sider the slimy, we note that it presents a constant hysteresis 
in the phenomenon of being transmuted into itself. The honey 
which slides off my spoon on to the honey contained in the 
jar first sculptures the surface by fastening itself on it in 
relief, and its fusion with the whole is presented as a gradual , 
sinking, a collapse which appears at once as a deflation (think 
for example of children’s pleasure in playing with a toy which 
whistles when inflated and groans mournfully when deflat- 
ingi5) and a spreading out — ^like the flattening of the full 
breasts of a woman who is lying on her back. 

In the slimy substance which dissolves into itself there is 
a visible resistance, like the refusal of an individual who 
does not want to be annihilated in the whole of being, and 
at the same time a softness pushed to its ultimate limit. For 
the soft is only an annihilation which is stopped halfway; 
soft is what furnishes us with the best image of our own 
destructive power • and its limitations. The slowness of the 
disappearance of the slimy drop in the bosom of the whole is 
grasped first in softness, which is like a retarded annihilation 
and seems to be playing for time, but this softness lasts up 
to the end; the drop is sucked into the body of the slimy sub- 
stance. This phenomenon gives rise to several characteristics 
of the slimy. First it is soft to touch. Throw water on the 
ground; it runs. Throw a slimy substance; it draws itself out, 
it displays itself, it flattens itself out, it is soft; touch the 
- slimy; it does not flee, it yields. There is in the very fact that 
we can not grasp water a pitiless hardness which gives to it a 
secret sense of being metal; finally it is incompressible like 
steel. The slimy is compressible. It gives us at first the im- 
pression that it is a being which can be possessed. Doubly so: 
its sliminess, its adherence to itself prevent it from escaping; 

I can take it in my hands, separate a certain quantity of honey 
or of pitch from the rest of the jar, and thereby create an 
individual object by a continuous creation; but at the same 
time the softness of this substance which is squashed in my 

15 Although slime has mysteriously preserved all fluidity in slow motion, it 
must not be confused with purges where fluidity, roughly outlined, undergoes 
abrupt breaks and blocks and where the substance, after a preliminary plan 
of pouring, rolls abruptly head over heels. 

i«Tr. In the original the reference is to gold-beater’s skin, a thin mem- 
brane used in making gold leaf. 



776 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

hands gives me the impression that I am perpetually destroy- 
ing it. 

Actually we have here the image of destruction-creation. 
The slimy is docile. Only at the very moment when I believe 
that I possess it, behold by a curious reversal, it possesses me. 
Here appears its essential character: its softness is leech-like. 
If an object which I hold in my hand is solid, I can let go 
when I please; its inertia symbolizes for me my total power; 
I give it its foundation, but it does not furnish any foundation 
for me; the For-itself collects ihe In-itself in the object and 
raises the object to the dignity of the In-itself without com- 
promising itself (i.e., the self of the For-itself) but always 
remaining an assimilating and creative power. It is the For- 
itself which absorbs the In-itself. In other words, possession 
asserts the primacy of the For-itself in the synthetic being “In- 
itself-For-itself.” Yet here is the slimy reversing the terms; the 
For-itself is suddenly compromised. I open my hands, I want 
to let go of the slimy and it sticks to me, it draws me, it sucks 
at me. Its mode of being is neither the reassuring inertia of 
the solid nor a dynamism like that in water which is exhausted 
in fleeing from me. It is a soft, yielding action, a moist and 
feminine sucking, it lives obscurely under my fingers, and I 
sense it like a dizziness; it draws me to it as the bottom of a 
precipice might draw me. There is something like a tactile 
fascination in the slimy. I am no longer the master in arrest- 
ing the process of appropriation. It continues. In one sense it 
is like the supreme docility of the possessed, the fidelity of a 
dog who gives himself even when one does not want him 
any longer, and in another sense there is underneath this 
docility a surreptitious appropriation of the possessor by the 
possessed. 

Here we can see the symbol which abruptly discloses itself: 
there exists a poisonous possession; there is a possibility that 
the In-itself might absorb the For-itself; that is, that a being 
might be constituted in a manner just the reverse of the 
“In-itself-For-itself,” and that in this new being the In-itself 
would draw the For-itself into its contingency, into its indif- 
ferent exteriority, into its foundationless existence. At this 
instant I suddenly understand the snare of the slimy: it is a 
fluidity which holds me and which compromises me; I can 
not slide on this slime, all its suction cups hold me back; it 
can not slide over me, it clings to me like a leech. The sliding 
however is not simply denied as in the case of the solid; it is 



777 


DOING AND HAVING 


degraded. The slimy seems to lend itself ’ 

for a body of slime at rest is not noticeably d^mct from a 
body of very dense liquid. But it is a trap. The sliding is 
sucked in by the sliding substance, and it leaves its traces 
upon me. The slime is like a liquid seen in a nightmare, where 
all its. properties are, animated by a sort of life and turn back 
against me. Slime is the revenge of the In-itself. A sicWy- 
sweet, feminine revenge which will be symbolized on another 
. level by the quality “sugary.” This is why the sugar-like sweet- 
ness to the taste — an indelible sweetness, which remams indei- 
initely in the mouth even after swallowing-— perfectly com- 
pletes the essence of the slimy. A sugary sliminess is the ideal 
of the slimy; it symbolizes the sugary death of the For-itself 
(like that of the wasp which sinks into the jam and drowns 


in it). 

But at the same time the slimy is myself, by the very fact 
that I outline an appropriation of the slimy substance. That 
sucking of the slimy which I feel on my hands outlines a kind 
of continuity of the slimy substance in myself. These long 
soft- strings of substance which fall from me to the slimy body 
(when, for example, I plunge my hand into it and then pull 
it out again) symbolize a rolling off of myself in the slime. 
And the hysteresis which I establish in the fusion of the ends 
of these strings with the larger body symbolizes the resistance 
of my being to absorption into the In-itself. If I dive into the 
water, if I plunge into it, if I let myself sink in it, I experience 
no discomfort, for I do not have any fear whatsoever that 
I may dissolve in it; I remain a solid in its liquidity. If I sink 
in the slimy, I feel that I am going to be lost in it; that is, that 
I may dissolve in the slime precisely because the slimy is in 
process of solidification. The sticky would present the same 
aspect as the slimy from this point of view, but it does not 
' 'have the same fascination, it does not compromise because it is 
inert. In the very apprehension of the slimy there is a gluey 
substance, compromising and without equilibrium, like the 
haunting memory of a metamorphosis. 

To touch the slimy is to risk being dissolved in sliminess. 
Now this dissolution by itself is frightening enough, because 
It IS the absorption of the For-itself by the In-itself as ink is 
absorbed by a blotter. But it is still more frightening in that 
the metamorphosis is not just into a thing (bad as that would 
be) but into slime. Even if I could conceive of a liquefaction 
ot myself (that is, a transformation of my being into water) I 


778 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


would not be inordinately alfected because water is the symbol 
of consciousness — its movement, its fluidity, its deceptive ap- 
pearance of being solid, its perpetual, flight — everything in it 
recalls the For-itself; to such a degree that psychologists 
who first noted the characteristics of duration of conscious- 
ness (James, Bergson) have very often compared it to a . river. 
A river best evokes the image of the constant interpenetration 
of the parts by a whole and their perpetual dissociation and 
free movement. 

But the slimy offers a horrible image; it is horrible in 
itself for a consciousness to become slimy. This is because the 
being of the slimy is a soft clinging, there is a sly solidarity 
and complicity of all its leech-like parts, a vague, soft effort 
made by each to individualize itself, followed by a falling 
back and flattening out that is emptied of the individual, 
sucked in on all sides by the substance. A consciousness which 
became slimy would be transformed by the thick stickiness of 
its ideas. From the time of our upsurge into the world, we are 
haunted by the image of a consciousness which would like to 
launch forth into the future, toward a projection of self, and 
which at the very moment when it was conscious of arriving 
there would be slyly held back by the invisible suction of the 
past and which would have to assist in its own slow dissolu- 
tion in this past which it was fleeing, would have to aid in the 
invasion of its project by a thousand parasites until finally it 
completely lost itself. The “flight of ideas” found in the psy- 
chosis of influence gives us the best image of this horrible 
condition. But what is it then which is expressed by this fear 
on the ontological level if not exactly the flight of the For-it- 
self before the In-itself of facticity; that is, exactly temporali- 
zation. The horror of the slimy is the horrible fear that time 
might become slimy, that facticity might progress continually 
and insensibly and absorb the For-itself which exists it. It is 
the fear not of death, not of the pure In-itself, not of nothing- 
ness, but of a particular type of being, which does not actually 
exist any more than the In-itself-For-itself and which is only 
represented by the slimy. It is an ideal being which I reject 
with all my strength and which haunts me as value haunts my 
eing, ^ an ideal being in which the foundationless , In-itself , 
has priority over the For-itself. We shall call it an Aniivalue. 

^ Thus in the project of appropriating the slimy, the sliminess 

as a symbol of an antivalue: it is a type 
® eing not realized but threatening .which will perpetually 



779 


DOING AND HAVING 


haunt consciousness as the constant danger which it is fleeing, 
and hence will suddenly transform the project of appropri^ 
tion into a project of flight. Something has appeared which 
is not the result of any prior experience but only of the pre- 
ontoiogical comprehension of the In-itself and -the For-itseu, 
and this is the peculiar meaning of the slirny. In one sense it 
is an experience since sliminess is an intuitive discovery; in 
another sense it is like the discovery of an adventure of being. 
Henceforth for the For-itself there appears a new danger, a 
threatening mode of being which must be avoided, a concrete 
category which it will discover everywhere. The slimy does not 
symbolize any psychic attitude a priori; it manifests a certain 
relation of being with itself and ^is relation has originally a 
psychic quality because I have discovered it in a plan of ap- 
propriation and because the sliminess has returned my image 
to me. Thus I am enriched from my first contact with the 
slimy, by a valid ontological pattern beyond the distinction 
between psychic and non-psychic, which will interpret the 
meaning of being and of all the existents of a certain' category, 
this category arising, moreover, like an empty skeletal frame- 
work before the experience with different kinds of sliminess. 
I have projected it into the world by my original project when 
faced with the slimy; it is an objective structure of the world 
and at the same time an antivalue; that is, it determines an 


area where slimy objects will arrange themselves. Henceforth 
each time that an object will manifest to me this relation of 
being, whether it is a matter of a handshake, of a smile, or of 
a thought, it will be apprehended by definition as slimy; that 
is, beyond its phenomenal context, it will appear to me as 
constituting along with pitch, glue, honey, etc,, the' great 
ontological region of sliminess. 


Conversely, to the extent that the this which I wish to 
appropriate represents the entire world, the slimy, from my 
first intuitive contact, appears to me rich with a host of ob- 
scure meanings and references which surpass it. The slimy is 
revealed in itself as “much more than the slimy.” From the 
moment of its appearance it transcends all distinctions be- 
tween psychic and physical, between the brute existent and 
&e meanings of the world; it is a possible meaning of being. 
The &st experience which the infant can have with the slimy 
enriches him psychologicaUy and morally; he will not need 
to reach adultjiood to discover the kind of sticky baseness 
which we figuratively name “slimy”; it is there near him in ' - 



780 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

the very sliminess of honey or of glue. What we say concern- 
ing the slimy is valid for all the objects which surround the 
child. The simple revelation of their matter extends his hori- 
zon to the extreme limits of being and bestows upon him at 
the same stroke a collection of clues for deciphering the being 
of all human facts. This certainly does not mean that he 
knows from the start the “ugliness,” the “characteristics,” or 
the “beauties” of existence. He is merely in possession of all 
the meanings of being of which ugliness and beauty, attitudes, 
psychic traits, sexual relations, etc, will never be more than 
particular exemplifications. The gluey, the sticky, the hazy, 
etc., holes in the sand and in the earth, caves, die light, the 
night, etc . — all reveal to him modes of pre-psychic and pre- 
sexual being which he will spend the rest ' of his life ex- 
plaining. There is no such thing as an “innocent” child. We 
will gladly recognize along with the Freudians the innumer- 
able relations existing between sexuality and certain matter and 
forms in the child’s environment. But we do not understand 
by this that a sexual instinct already constituted has charged 
them with a sexual significance. On the contrary it seems to us 
that this matter and these forms are apprehended in them- 
selves, and they reveal to the child the For-itself’s modes of 
being and relations to being which will illuminate and shape 
his sexuality. 

To cite only one example — many psychoanalysts have 
been struck by the attraction which all kinds of holes exert on 
the child (whether holes in the sand or in. the ground, crypts, 
hollows, or whatever), and they have explained this attrac- 
tion either by the anal character of infant sexuality, or by 
prenatal shock, or by a presentiment of the adult sexual act. 
But we can not accept any of these explanations. The idea 
of “birth trauma” is highly fantastic.' The comparison of the 
hole to the feminine sexual organ supposes in the child an 
experience which he can not possibly have had or a presenti- 
ment which we can not justify. As for the child’s anal sexuali- 
ty, we would not think of denying it; but if it is going to 
illuminate the holes which he encounters in the perceptual 
field and charge them with symbolism, then it is necessary 
that the child apprehend his anus as a hole. To put it more 
clearly, the child would have to apprehend the essence of A® 
hole, of the orifice, as corresponding to the sensation which 
he receives from his anus. But we have demonstrated suf- 
ficiently the subjective character of “my relation with my 



781 


DOING AND HAVING 


body” so that we can understand the impossibility of saying 
that the child apprehends a particular part of his body as an 
objective structure of the universe. It is only to another per- 
son that the anus appears as an orifice. The child himself can 
never have experienced it as such; even the intimate care 
which the mother gives the child could not reveal the anus in 
this aspect, since the anus as an erogenous zone, or a zone of 
^ pain, is not provided with tactile nerve endings. On the con- 
trary it is only through another — ^through the words which 
the mother uses to designate the child’s body — that he learns 
that his anus is a hole. It is therefore the objective nature of 
the hole perceived in the world which is going to illuminate 
for him the objective structure and the meaning of the anal 
zone and which will give a transcendent meaning to the 
erogenous sensations which hitherto he was limited to merely 
“existing.” In itself then the hole is the symbol of a mode of 
being which existential psychoanalysis must elucidate. 

We can not make such a detailed study here. One can see 
at once, however, that the hole is originally presented as a 
nothingness -'“to be filled” with my own flesh; the child can 
not restrain himself from putting his finger or his whole arm 
into the hole. It presents itself to me as the empty image of 
myself. I have only to crawl into it in order to 'make myself 
exist in the world which awaits me. The ideal of the hole is 


then an excavation which can be carefully moulded about my 
flesh in such a manner that by squeezing myself into it and 
fitting myself tightly inside it, I shall contribute to making a 
fullness of being exist in the world. Thus to plug up a hole 
means originally to make a sacrifice of my body in order that 
the plenitude of being may exist; that is, to subject the 
passion of the For-itself so as to shape, to perfect, and to 
preserve the totality of the In-itself.i^ 

Here at its origin we grasp one of the most fundamental 
tendencies of human reality — ^the tendency to fill. We shall 
nieet with this tendency again in the adolescent and in the 

^ plugging up 

holes, m filling empty places, in realizing and symbolically 
establishing a plenitude. The child recognizes as the results 
experiences that he himself has holes. When he 
puts his fingers in his mouth, he tries to wall up the holes in 
IS face; he expects that his finger will merge with his lips 

« We should note as well the importance of the opposite tendency to noV.> 
through holes, which in itself demands an existenuS^ anSysS 



782 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

and the roof of his mouth and block up the buccal orifice as 
one fills the crack in a wall with cement; he seeks again the 
density, the uniform and spherical plenitude of Parmenidean 
being; if he sucks his thumb, it is precisely in order to dis- 
solve it, to transform it into a sticky paste which will seal the 
hole of his mouth. This tendency is certainly one of the most 
fundamental among those which serve as the basis for the act 
of eating; nourishment is the “cement” which will seal the 
mouth; to eat is among other things to be filled up. 

It is only from this standpoint that we can pass on to sexu- 
ality. The obscenity of the feminine sex is that of every- 
thing which “gapes open.” It is an appeal to being as all 
holes are. In herself woman appeals to a strange flesh which is 
to transform her into a fullness of being by penetration and 
dissolution. Conversely woman senses her condition as an 
appeal precisely because she is “in the form of a hole.” This 
is the true origin of Adler’s complex. Beyond any doubt her 
sex is a mouth and a voracious mouth which devours the 
penis — a fact which can easily lead to the idea of castration. 
The amorous act is the castration of the man; but this is 
above all because sex is a hole. We have to do here with a 
pre-sexual contribution which will become one of the com- 
ponents of sexuality as an empirical, complex, human attitude 
but which far from deriving its origin from the sexed being 
has nothing in common with basic sexuality, the nature of 
which we have explained in Part Three. Nevertheless the ex- 
perience with the hole, when the infant sees the reality, in- 
cludes the ontological presentiment of sexual experience in 
general; it is with his flesh that the child stops up the hole and 
the hole, before all sexual specification, is an obscene expec- 
tation, an appeal to the flesh. 

We can see the importance which the elucidation of these 
immediate and concrete existential categories will assume for 
existential psychoanalysis. In this way we can apprehend the 
very general projects of human reality. But what chiefly in- 
terests the psychoanalyst is to' determine the free project of 
the unique person in terms of the individual relation which 
unites him to these various symbols of being. I can love slimy 
contacts, have a horror of holes, etc. That does not mean that 
for me the slimy, the greasy, a hole, etc. have lost their general 
ontological meaning, but on the contrary that because of this 
meaning, I determine myself in this or that manner in relation 
to them. If the slimy is indeed the symbol of a being in which 



doing and having 783 

the fof-itself is swallowed up by the in-itself, what kind of a 
person am I if in encountering others, I love the slimy? To 
what fundamental project of myself am. I referred J 
explain this love of an ambiguous, sucking in-itself? In this 
way tastes do not remain irreducible givens; if one knows how 
to question them, they reveal to us the fundamental projects 
of the person. Down to even our alimentary preferences they 
all have -a meaning. 'We can account for this fact if we will 
reflect that each taste is presented, not as an obsuxd datum 
which we must excuse but as an evident value. If I like the 
taste of garlic, it seems irrational to me that other people can 
not like it. ' 

To eat is to appropriate by destruction; it is at the same 
time to be filled up with a certain being. And this being is 
given as a synthesis of temperature, density, and flavor prop- 
er. In a word this synthesis signifies a certain being; and 
when we eat, we do not limit ourselves to knowing certain 
qualities of this being through taste; by tasting them we appro- 
priate them. Taste is assimilation; by the very act of biting the 
tooth reveals, the density of a body which it is transforming 
into gastric contents. Tlius the synthetic intuition of food is 
in itself an assimilative destruction. It reveals to me the being 
which I am going to make my flesh. Henceforth, what I 
accept or what I reject with disgust is the very being of that 
existent, or if you prefer, the totality of the food proposes, to 
me a certain mode of being of the being which I accept or 
refuse. This totality is organized as a form in which less in- 
tense qualities of density and of temperature are effaced be- 
hind the flavor proper which -expresses them. The sugary, 
for example, expresses the slimy when we eat a spoonful of 
honey or molasses, just as an analytical function expresses a 
geometric curve. This means that all qualities which are not 
pictly speaking flavor but which are massed, melted, buried 
in the flavor, represent the matter of the flavor. (The piece 
of chocolate which at first offers a resistance to my tooth soon 
abruptly gives way and crumbles; its resistance first, then its 
crumbling is chocolate.) In addition they are united to certain 
temporal characteristics of flavor; that is, to its mode of tem- 
porahzation. Certain tastes give themselves all at once, some 
are like delayed-action fuses, some release themselves by de- 
grees, certain ones dwindle slowly until they disappear, and 
at the very moment one thinks to possess 
mem. These qualities are organized along with density and 



784 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 


temperature; in addition on another level they express the 
visual aspect of the food. If I eat a pink cake, the taste of it 
is pink; the light sugary perfume, the oiliness of the butter 
cream are the pink. Thus I eat the pink as I see the sugary. 
We conclude that flavor, due to this fact, has a complex archi- 
tecture and differentiated matter; it is this structured matter 
— ^which represents for us a particular type of being — that we 
can assimilate or reject with nausea, according to our original 
project. It is not a matter of indifference whether we like 
oysters or clams, snails or shrimp, if only we know how to 
unravel the existential significance of these foods. 

Generally speaking there is no irreducible taste or inclina- 
tion. They all represent a certain appropriative choice of 
being. It is up to existential psychoanalysis to compare and 
classify them. Ontology abandons us here; it has merely en- 
abled us to determine the ultimate ends of human reality, its 
fundamental possibilities, and the value which haunts it. Each 
human reality is at the same time a direct project to metamor- 
phose its own For-itself into an In-itself-For-itself and a proj- 
ect of the appropriation of the world as a totality of being-in- 
itself, in the form of a fundamental quality. Every human 
reality is a passion in that it projects losing itself so as to 
found being and by the same stroke to constitute the In-itself 
which escapes contingency by being its own foundation, the 
Ens causa sui, which religions call God. Thus the passion of 
man is the reverse of that of Christ, for man loses himself 
as man in order that God may be born. But the idea of God 
is contradictory and we lose ourselves in vain. Man is a use- 
less passion. 



Conclusion 


■ I. IN-ITSELF AHD FOR-ITSELF; META- 
PHYSICAL IMPLICATIONS 

We are finally in a position to form conclusions. Already 
in the Introduction we discovered consciousness as an- appeal 
to being, and we showed that the cogito refers immediately to 
a being-in-itself which is the obiect of consciousness. But 
after our description of the In-itself and the For-itsen, it 
appeared to us difficult to estabfish a bond between them, 
and we feared that we might fall into an insurmountable 
dualism. This dualism threatened us again in another way. In 
fact to the extent that it can be said of the For-itseh that it is, 
we found ourselves confronting two radically distinct^ modes 
of being: that of the For-itself which has to be what it is i.e., 
which is what it is not and which is not what it is;; — ^d that 
of the In-itself which is what it is. We asked then if the ffis- 
covery of these two types of being had resulted in establishing 
an hiatus which would divide Being (as a general category 
belonging to all existents) into two incommunicable re^ons, 

' in each one of which the notion of Being must be taken in an 
original and unique sense. 

Our research has enabled us to answer the first of these 
questions: the For-itself and the In-itself are reunited by a 
synthetic connection which is nothing other than the For-it- 
self itself. The For-itself, in fact, is nothing but the pure ni- 


785 


786 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

hilation of the In-itself; it is like a hole in being at the 
heart of Being. One may be reminded here of that convenient 
fiction by which certain popularizers are accustomed to illus- 
trate the principle of the conservation of energy. If, they say, 
a single one of the atoms which constitute the universe 
were annihilated, there would result a catastrophe which 
would extend to the entire universe, and this would be, in 
particular, the end of the Earth and of the solar system. This 
metaphor can he of use to us here. The For-itself is like a tiny 
nihilation which has its origin at the heart of Being; and 
this nihilation is sufficient to cause a total upheaval to hap- 
pen to the In-itself. This upheaval is the world. The for-itself 
has no reality save that of being the nihilation of being. Its 
sole qualification comes to it from the fact that it is the 
nihilation of an individual and particular In-itself and , not 
of a being in general. The For-itself is not nothingness in 
general but a particular privation; it constitutes itself as the 
privation of this being. Therefore we have no business asking 
about the way in which the for-itself can he united with the 
in-itself since the for-itself is in no way an autonomous sub- 
stance. As a nihilation it is made-to-be by the in-itself; as an 
internal negation it must by means of the in-itself make 
known to itself what it is hot and consequently what it 
has to be. If the cogito necessarily leads outside the self, if 
consciousness is a slippery slope on which one can not take 
One’s stand without immediately finding oneself tipped outside 
onto being-in-itself, this is because consciousness does not 
have by itself any sufficiency of being as an absolute subjec- 
tivity; from the start it refers to the thing. 

For consciousness there is no being except for this precise 
obligation to be a revealing intuition of something. What does 
this mean except that consciousness is the Platonic Other? 
We may recall the fine description which the Stranger in the 
Sophist gives of this “other,”^ which can he apprehended 
only “as in a dream,” which has" no being except its being- 
other (i.e., which enjoys only a borrowed being), which if 
considered by itself disappears and which takes on a marginal 
existence only if, one fixes his look on being, this other which 
is exhausted in being other than itself, and other than being. It 
even seems that Plato perceived the dynamic character which 
the otherness of the other presented in relation to itself, for in 

1 Tr. “The other” in this passage must of course not be confused with “The 
Other” discussed in connecuon with the problem of human relationships. 



CONCLUSION 


787 


certain passages he sees in this the origin of motion. But he 
could have gone still further; he would have seen then that 
the other, or relative non-being, could have a semblance of 
existence only by virtue of consciousness. To be other than 
being is to be self-consciousness in the unity of the tempo- 
ralizing ekstases. Indeed what can the otherness be if not that 
game of musical chairs played by the reflected and the reflect- 
ing which we described as at the heart of the for-itself? For 
the only way in which the other can exist as other is to be 
consciousness (of) being other. Otherness is, in fact, an in- 
ternal negation, and only a consciousness can be constituted 
as an internal negation. Every other conception of otherness 
will amount to positing it as an in-itself — that is, establishing 
between it and being an external relation which would necessi- 
tate the presence of a witness so as to establish that the other 
is other. &an the in-itself. However the other can not be other 
without emanating from being; in this respect it is relative to 
the in-itself. But neither can it be other without making itself 
other; otherwise its otherness would become a given and 
therefore a being capable of being considered in-itself. In so 
far as it is relative to the in-itself, the other is affected with 
facticity; in so far as it makes itself, it is an absolute. This is 
what we pointed out when we said that the for-itself is not 
the foundation of its being-as-nothingness-of-being but 
that it perpetually founds its nothin gness-of -being. Thus the 
for-itseff is an absolute Unselbstdndig, what we have called a 
non-substantial absolute. Its reality is purely interrogative. If 
it can posit questions this is because it is itself always in 
question; its being is never given but interrogated since it is 
always separated from itself by the nothingness of otherness. 
The for-itself is always in suspense because its being is a per- 
petual reprieve. If it could ever join with its being, then the 
otherness would by the same stroke disappear and along with 
it possibles, knowledge, the world. Thus the ontological prob- 
lem of knowledge is resolved by the affirmation of the onto- 
logical primacy, of the in-itself over the for-itself. 

But this immediately gives rise to a metaphysical interroga- 
tion. The upsurge of the for-itself starting from the in-itself is 
m no way comparable to the dialectical genesis of the Platonic 
Other starting from being. “Being” and “other” are, for Plato, 
genera. But we, on' the contrary, have seen that being is an 
individual venture. Similarly the appearance of the for-itself 
IS f' bsolute event which comes' to being. There is therefore 


788 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

room here for a metaphysical problem which could formu- 
lated thus* Why does the for-itself arise m terms of being? 
wt indeed apply the term “metaphysical” to the study of 
individual processes which have given birth to this world as a 
concrete and particular totality. In this sense metaphysics w 
to ontology as history is to sociology. We have seen that it 
would be absurd to ask why being is other, that the question 
can have meaning only within the limits of a for-itself and 
that it even supposes the ontological priority of nothingness 
over being. It can be posited only -if combined with ^another 
question which is externally analogous and yet very different: 
Why is it that there is being? But we know now^ that we 
must carefully distinguish between these two questions. The 
first is devoid of meaning; all the “Whys” in fact are subse- 
quent to being and presuppose it. Being is without reason, 
without cause, and without necessity; the very definition of 
being releases to us its original contingency. To the second 
question we have already replied, for it is not posited on &e 
metaphysical level but on that of ontology: “There is” being 
because the for-itself is such that there is being. The charac- 
ter of a phenomenon comes to being through the for-itself. 

But while questions on the origin of being or on the ori- 
gin of the world are either devoid of meaning or receive a 
reply within the actual province of ontology, the case^ is not 
the same for the origin of the for-itself. The for-itself is such 
that it has the right to turn back on itself toward its own 
origin. The being by which the “Why” comes into being has 
the right to posit its own “Why” since- it is itself an interroga- 
tion, a “Why.” To this question ontology can not reply, for 
the problem here is to explain an event, not to describe the 
structures of a being. At most it can point out that the noth- 
ingness which is made-to-be by the in-itself is not a simple 
emptiness devoid of meaning. The meaning of the nothingness 
of the nihilation is to-be-made-to-be in order to found bemg. 
Ontology furnishes us two pieces of information which serve 
as the basis for metaphysics; first, that every process of a 
foundation of the self is a rupturq in the identity-of-being of 
the in-itself, a withdrawal by being in relation to itself and 
the appearance of presence to self or consciousness. It is only 
by making itself for-itself that being can aspire to be the cause 
of itself. Consciousness as the nihilation of being appears 
therefore as one stage in a progression toward the immanence 
of causality — i.e., toward being a self-cause. The progression. 



CONCLUSION 


789 


however, stops there as the result of the insufficiency of being 
in the for-itself. The temporalization of consciousness is not 
ah ascending progress toward the dignity of the causa sui; it 
is a surface run-oif whose origin is, on the contrary, the im- 
possibility of being a self -cause. Also the ens causa sui remains 
as the lacked, the indication of an impossible vertical sur- 
passing which by its very non-existence conditions the flat 
movement of consciousness; in the same way the vertical at- 
traction which the moon exercises on the ocean has for its re- 
sult the horizontal displacement which is the tide. The second 
piece of information which metaphysics, can draw from ontol- 
ogy is that the for-itself is effectively a perpetual project of 
founding itself qua being and a perpetual failure of this proj- 
ect. Presence to itself with the various directions of its ni- 
hilation (the ekstatic nihilation of the three temporal dimen- 
sions, the twin nihilation of the dyad reflected-reflecting) 
represents the primary upsurge of this project; reflection rep- 
resents the splitting of the project which turns back on itself 
in order to found itself at least as a project, and the aggrava- 
tion of the nihilating hiatus by the failure of this project it- 
self. “Doing” and “having,” the cardinal categories of human 
reality, are immediately or mediately reduced to the project of 
being. Finally the plurality of both can be interpreted as hu- 
man reality’s final attempt to found itself, resulting in the 
radical separation of being and the consciousness of being. 

Thus ontology teaches us two things: (1) If the in-itself 
were to found itself, it could attempt to do so only by mak- 
ing itself consciousness; that is, the concept of causa sui in- 
cludes within it that of presence to self — i.e., the nihilating 
decompression of being; (2) Consciousness is in fact a proj- 
ect of founding itself; that is, of attaining to the dignity of 
the in-itself-for-itself or in-itself-as-self-cause. But we can not 
derive anything further from this. Nothing allows us to affirm 
the^ ontological level that the nihilation of the in-itself in 
for-itself has for its meaning — ^from the start and at the very 
heart of the in-itself — ^the. project of being its own self-cause. 
Quite the contrary. Ontology here comes up against a pro- 
found contradiction since it is through the for-itself that the 
possibility of a foundation comes to the world. In order to be 
a project of founding itself, the in-itself would of necessity 
have to be originally a presence to itsejf — i.e., it would have 
to be already consciousness. Ontology will therefore limit it- , 
self to declaring that everything takes place as if the in-itself 


790 


BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

in a project to found itself gave itself the mddiflcation of 
the for-itself. It is up to metaphysics to form the hypotheses 
which will allow us to conceive of this^ process as the absc^ 
lute event which comes to crown the individual venture which 
is the existence of being. It is evident that these hypotheses 
wiU remain hypotheses since we can not expect either further 
validation or invalidation. What wiU make their validity is 
only the possibUity which they will offer us of unifying the 
givens of ontology. This unification natmally must not be 
constituted in the perspective of an historical becoming since 
temporality comes into being through the for-itself. There 
would be therefore no sense in asking what being was before 
the appearance of the for-itself. But metaphysics must never- 
theless attempt to determine the nature and the meaning of 
this prehistoric process, the source of all history, which is the 
articulation of the mdividual venture (or existence of &e in- 
itself) with the absolute event (or upsurge of the for-itself). 
In particular the task belongs to the metaphysician of de- 
ciding whether the movement is or is not a first “attempt” on 
the part of the in-itself to found itself and to determine what 
are the relations of motion as a “malady of being” with the 
for-itself as a more profound malady pushed to nihilation. 

It remains for us to consider the second problem which 
we formulated in our Introduction: If the in-itself and the 
for-itself are two modalities' of being, is there not a hiatus at 
the very core of the idea of being? And is its comprehension 
not severed into two incommunicable parts by the very fact 
that its extension is constituted by two radically heterogenoiw 
classes? What is there in co mm on between the being which « 
what it is, and the being which is what it is not and which is 
not what it is? What can help us here, however, is the con- 
clusion of our preceding inquiry. We have just shown in fact 
that the in-itself and the for-itself are not juxtaposed. Quite 
the contrary, the for-itself without the in-itself is a kind of 
abstraction; it could not exist any more than a color could 
exist without form or a sound without pitch and without 
timbre. A consciousness which would be consciousness of 
nothing would be an absolute nothing. But if consciousness 
is bound to the in-itself by an internal relation, doesn’t this 
mean that it is articulated with the in-itself so as to con- 
stitute a totality, and is it not this totality which would^ be 
given the name being or reality? Doubtless the for-itself is a 
nihilation, but as a nihilation it is; and it is in a priori unity 



CONCLUSION 791 

with the in-itself. Thus the Greeks were accustomed to dis- 
tinguish cosmic reality, which they called To ttov, from 
the totdity constituted by this and by the infinite void which 
surrounded it — a totality which they called To oAov. To be 
sure, we have been able to call the for-itself a nothing and to 
declare that there is “outside of the in-itself” nothing except 
a reflection of this nothing which is itself polarized and de- 
fined by the in-itself — ^inasmuch as the for-itself is precisely 
the nothingness of this in-itself. But here as in Greek philoso- 
phy a question is raised: which shall we call real? To' which 
shall we attribute being? To the cosmos or to what we called 
T6 oXov? To the pure in-itself or to the in-itself surrounded 
by that shell of nothingness which we have designated by 
the name of the for-itself? 

But if we are to consider total being as constituted by the 
synthetic organization of the in-itself and of the for-itself, are 
we not going to encounter again the difficulty which we 
wished to avoid? And as for that hiatus which we revealed in 
the concept of being, are we not going to meet it at present in 
the existent itself? What definition indeed are we to give to 
an existent which as in-itself would be what it is and as for- 
itself would be what it is not? 

If we wish to resolve these difficulties, we must take into 
account what is required of an existent if it is to be considered 
as a totality: it is necessary that the diversity of its structures 
be held within a unitary synthesis in such a way that each of 
them considered apart is only an abstraction. And certainly 
consciousness considered apart is only an abstraction; but the 
imitself has no need of the for-itself m order to be; the 
“passion” of the for-itself only causes there to be in-itself. 
The phenomenon of in-itself is an abstraction without con- 
sciousness but its being is not an abstraction. 

If we wish to conceive of a synthetic organization such 
that the for-itself is inseparable from the in-itself and con- 
versely such that the in-itself is indissolubly bound to the for- 
i^elf, we must conceive of this synthesis in such a way that 

V would receive its existence from the nihilation 

which caused there to be consciousness of it. What does this 
mean if not that the indissoluble totality of in-itself and for- 
itself is conceivable only in the form of a being which is its 
own “self-cause”? It is this being and no other which could 
be v^id absolutely as that 6Xov of which we spoke earlier. 
And if we can raise the question of the being of the for-itself 



792 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

articulated in the in-itself, it is because we define^ ourselves 
a priori by means of a pre-ontological comprehension of the 
ens causa sui. Of course this ens causa sui is impossible, znA 
the concept of it, as we have seen,_ includes a contradiction. 
Nevertheless the fact remains that since we raise the question 
of the being of the o\ov by adopting the point of view of the 
causa sui, it is from this point of view that we must se 
about examining the credentials of this o\ov. Has it not 
appeared due to the mere fact of the upsurge of the for-itselt, 
and is not the for-itself originally a project of bemg its own 
self-cause? Thus we begin to grasp the nature of total reality. 
Total being, the concept of which would not be cleft by an 
hiatus and which would nevertheless not exclude the nihilating- 
nihilated being of the for-itself, that being whose exis- 
tence would be a unitary synthesis of the in-itself and of con- 
sciousness — ^this ideal being would be the in-itself founded y 
the for-itself and identical with the for-itself which founds it 
— i.e., the ens causa sui. But precisely because^ we adopt the 
point of view of this ideal being in order to judge the real 
being which we call . 6\ov, we must establish that the real is 
an abortive effort to attain to the dignity of the self-cause. 
Everything happens as if the world, man, and man-in-the- 
world succeeded in realizing only a missing God. Everything 
happens therefore as if the in-itself and the for-itself were pre- 
sented in a state of disintegration in relation to an ideal syn- 
thesis. Not that the integration has ever taken place but on 
the contrary precisely because it is always indicated an 


always impossible. . 

It is this perpetual failure which explains both the indissol- 
ubility of the in-itself and of the for-itself and at the same 
time their relative independence. Similarly when the unity o 
the cerebral functions is shattered, phenomena are produce 
which simultaneously present a relative autonomy and 
at the same time can be manifested only on the ground o 
the disintegration of a totality. It is this failure whic 
explains the hiatus which we encounter both in the concep 
of being and in the existent. If it is impossible to pass 
from the notion of being-in-itself to that of being-for-itse 
and to reunite them in a common genus, this is because me 
passage in fact from the one to the other and their reimitmg 
can not be effected. We know that for Spinoza and for Hcge , 
for example, if a synthesis is arrested before its completion 
and the terms fixed in a relative dependence and at the same 



CONCLUSION 


793 


time in a relative independence, then the synthesis is constitut- 
ed suddenly as an error. For example, it is m the notion 
of a sphere that for Spinoza the rotatiori of a sermcircle around 
its diameter finds its justification and its meanmg. But if we 
imagine that the notion of a sphere is on prmciple out or 
reach, then the phenomenon of the rotation of the semicircle 
becomes false. It has been decapitated; the idea of rotation 
and the idea of a circle are held together without being able 
to be united in a synthesis which surpasses them and justifies 
them; the one remains irreducible to the other. This is pre- 
cisely what happens here. We shall say therefore that the 
oXov we are considering is like a decapitated notion in per- 
petual disintegration. And it is in the form of a disintegrated 
ensemble that it presents itself to us in its ambiguity — that 
so that one can ad libitum insist on the dependence of the 
beings under consideration or on their independence. There is 
here a passage which is not completed, a short circuit 
On this level we find again that notion of d detotalized 
totality which we have already met in connection with the 
for-itself itself and in connection with the consciousness ^ of 
others. But this is a third type of detotalization. In the simply 
detotalized totality of reflection the reflective had to be the 
reflected-on, and the reflected-on had to be reflected. The 
double negation remained evanescent. In the case of the for- 
others. the (reflection-reflecting) reflected was distinguished 
from the (reflection-reflecting) reflecting in that each one 
had to not-be the other. Thus the for-itself and the-other-for- 


itself constitute a being in which each one confers the being-' 
other on the other by making himself other. As for the totality 
of the for-itself and the in-itself, this has for its characteristic 
the fact that the for-itself makes itself other in relation to the 
m-itself but that the in-itself is in no way other than the for- 
itself in its being; the in-itself purely and simply is. If the 
relation of the in-itself to the for-itself were the reciprocal of 
the relation of the for-itself to the in-itself, we should fafl 
into the case of being-for-others. But this is definitely not the 
case, and it is this absence of reciprocity which characterizes 
the oXov of which we spoke earlier. To this extent it is not 
absurd to raise the -question of the totality. In fact when we 
studied the for-others, we established that it was necessary that 
there be a being which was an “other-me” and which had to 

scissiparity of the for-others. But at the same 
time this being which is an other-me appeared to us as being 



794 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

able to exist only if it included an inapprehensible non-being 
of exteriority. We asked then if the paradoxical character of 
the totality was in itself an irreducible and if we could posit 
the mind as the being which is and which is not. But we 
decided that the question of the synthetic unity of conscious- 
nesses had no meaning, for it presupposed that it was possible 
for us to assume a point of view on the totality; actually we 
exist on the foundation of this totality and as engaged in it. 

But if we can not “adopt a point of view on the totality,” 
this is because the Other on principle denies that he is I as I 
deny that I am he. It is the reciprocity of the relation which 
prevents me from ever grasping it in its integrity. In the case 
of the internal negation for-itself-in-itself, on the contrary, the 
relation is not reciprocal, and I am both one of the terms of 
the relation and the relation itself. I apprehend being, 1 am 
the apprehension of being, I am only an apprehension of 
being. And the being which I apprehend is not posited 
against me so as to apprehend me in turn; it is what is appre- 
hended. Its being simply does not coincide in any way with 
its being-apprehended. In one sense therefore I can pose the 
question of the totality. To be sure, I exist here as engaged in 
this totality, but I can be an exhaustive consciousness of it 
since I am at once consciousness of the being and self-con- 
sciousness. This question of the totality, however, does not 
belong to the province of ontology. For ontology the only 
regions of being which can be elucidated are those of the in- 
itself, of the for-itself, and the ideal region of the “self- 
cause.” For ontology it makes no difference whether we con- 
sider the for-itself articulated in the in-itself as a well- 
marked duality or as a disintegrated being. It is up to meta- 
physics to decide which will be more profitable for knowledge 
(in particular for phenomenological psychology, for anthro- 
pology, etc.) : will it deal with a being which we shall caU 
the phenomenon and which will be provided with two di- 
mensions of being, the dimension in-itself and the dimension 
for-itself (from this point of yiew there would be only one 
phenomenon: the world), just as in the physics of Einstein it 
has been found advantageous to speak of an event conceived 
as having spatial dimensions and a temporal dimension and as 
determining its place in a space-time; or, on the other hand, 
will it remain preferable despite all to preserve the ancient 
duality “consciousness'-being.” The only observation which 
ontology can hazard here is that in case it appears useful to 



CONCLUSION 795 

employ the new notion of a phenomenon as a disintegrated 
totality, it will be necessary to speak of it both in terras of 
immanence' and in terras of transcendence. The danger, in 
fact, would be of falling into either a doctrine of pure im- 
manence (Husserlian idealism) or into one of pure transcen- 
dence which would look on the phenomenon as a new kind 
of object. But immanence will be always limited by the phe- 
nomenon’s dimension in-itself, and transcendence will be 
limited by its dimension for-itself . 

After having decided the question of the origin of the 
for-itself and of the nature of the phenomenon of the world, 
the metaphysician will be able to attack various problems of 
primary importance, in particular that of action. Action, in 
fact, is to be considered simultaneously on the plane of the 
for-itself and on, that of the in-itself, for it involves a project 
which has an immanent origin and which determines a modi- 
fication in the being of the transcendent. It would be of no 
use to declare that the action modifies only the phenomenal 
appearance of the thing. If the phenomenal appearance of a 
cup can be modified up- to the annihilation of the cup qua 
cup, and if the being of the cup is nothing but its quality, 
then the action envisaged must be capable of modifying the 
very being of the cup. The problem of action therefore sup- 
poses the elucidation of the transcendent efficacy of conscious- 
ness, and it puts us on the path of its veritable relation of 
being with, being. It reveals to us also, owing to the repercus- 
sions of an act in the world, a relation of being with being 
which, although apprehended in exteriority by the physicist, 
is neither 'pure exteriority nor immanence but which refers us 
to the notion of the Gestalt form. It is therefore in these terms 
that one might attempt a metaphysics of nature. 


n. ETHICAL IMPLICATIONS 

Ontology itself can not formulate ethical precepts. It is 
concerned solely with what is, and we can not possibly derive 
imperatives from ontology’s indicatives. It does, however, 
allow us to catch a glimpse of what sort of ethics will assume 
Its responsibilities when confronted with a human reality in 
suuathn. Ontology has revealed to us, in fact, the origin and 
the nature of value; we have seen that value is the lack in re- 
lation to which the for-itself determines its being as a lack. 



796 BEING AND NOTHINGNESS 

By the very fact that the for-itself exists, as we have seen, 
value arises to haunt its being-for-itself. It follows that the 
various tasks of the for-itself can be made-the object of an 
existential psychoanalysis, for they all aim at producing the 
missing synthesis of consciousness and being in the form of 
value or self-cause. Thus existential psychoanalysis is moral 
description, for it releases to us the ethical meaning of various 
human projects. It indicates to us the necessity of abandoning 
the psychology of interest along with any utilitarian interpre- 
tation of human conduct — by revealing to us. the ideal 
meaning of all human attitudes. These meanings are beyond 
egoism and altruism, beyond also any behavior which is called 
disinterested. Man makes himself man in order to be God, 
and selfness considered from this point of view can appear to 
be an egoism; but precisely because there is no common 
measure between human reality and the self-cause which it 
wants to be, one could just as well say that man loses himself 
in order that the self-cause may exist. We will consider then 
that all human existence is a passion, the famous self-in- 
terest being only one way freely chosen among others to 
realize this passion. 

But the principal result of existential psychoanalysis must 
be to make us repudiate the spirit of seriousness. The 
spirit of seriousness has two characteristics: it considers values 
as transcendent givens independent of human subjectivity, 
and it transfers the quality of “desirable” from the ontologi- 
cal structure of things to their simple material constitution. 
For the spirit of seriousness, for example, bread is desirable 
because it is necessary to live (a value written in an intelligi- 
ble heaven) and because bread is nourishing. The result of the 
serious attitude, which as we know rules the world, is to 
cause the symbolic values of things to be drunk in by their 
empirical idiosyncrasy as ink by a blotter; it puts forward the 
opacity of the desired object and posits it in itself as a de- 
sirable irreducible. Thus we are already on the moral plane 
but concurrently on that of bad faith, for it is an ethics which 
is ashamed of itself and does not dare speak its name. It has 
obscured all its goals in order to free itself from anguish. 
Man pursues being blindly by hiding from himself the free 
project which is this pursuit. He makes himself such .that he 
is waited for by all the tasks placed along his way. Objects are 
mute demands, and he is nothing in himself but the passive 
obedience to these demands. 

## THIRD BOOK: SISYPHUS


An Absurd Reasoning 

Absurdity and Suicide 

There is but one truly serious philosophical problem, and that 
is suicide. Judging whether life is or is not worth living amounts to 
answering the fundamental question of philosophy. All the rest— 
whether or not the world has three dimensions, whether the mind 
has nine or twelve categories—comes afterwards. These are 
games; one must first answer. And if it is true, as Nietzsche claims, 
that a philosopher, to deserve our respect, must preach by example, 
you can appreciate the importance of that reply, for it will precede 
the definitive act. These are facts the heart can feel; yet they call 
for careful study before they become clear to the intellect. 

If I ask myself how to judge that this question is more urgent 
than that, I reply that one judges by the actions it entails. I have 
never seen anyone die for the ontologi-cal argument. Galileo, who 
held a scientific truth of great importance, abjured it with the 
greatest ease as soon as it endangered his life. In a certain sense, he 
did rightThat truth was not worth the stake. Whether the earth 
or the sun revolves around the other is a matter of profound 
indifference. To tell the truth, it is a futile question. On the other 
hand, I see many people die because they judge that life is not 
worth living. I see others paradoxically getting killed for the ideas 
or illusions that give them a reason for living (what is called a 
reason for living is also an excellent reason for dying). I therefore 
conclude that the meaning of life is the most urgent of questions. 
How to answer it? On all essential problems (I mean thereby those 
that run the risk of leading to death or those that intensify the 


passion of living) there are probably but two methods of thought: 
the method of La Palisse and the method of Don Quixote. Solely 
the balance between evidence and lyricism can allow us to achieve 
simultaneously emotion and lucidity. In a subject at once so 
humble and so heavy with emotion, the learned and classical 
dialectic must yield, one can see, to a more modest attitude of mind 
deriving at one and the same time from common sense and 
understanding. 

Suicide has never been dealt with except as a social 
phenomenon. On the contrary, we are concerned here, at the outset, 
with the relationship between individual thought and suicide. An 
act like this is prepared within the silence of the heart, as is a great 
work of art. The man himself is ignorant of it. One evening he 
pulls the trigger or jumps. Of an apartment-building manager who 
had killed himself I was told that he had lost his daughter five 
years before, that be bad changed greatly since, and that that 
experience had “undermined” him. A more exact word cannot be 
imagined. Beginning to think is beginning to be undermined. 
Society has but little connection with such beginnings. The worm 
is in man’s heart. That is where it must be sought. One must follow 
and understand this fatal game that leads from lucidity in the face 
of existence to flight from light. 

There are many causes for a suicide, and generally the most 
obvious ones were not the most powerful. Rarely is suicide 
committed (yet the hypothesis is not excluded) through reflection. 
What sets off the crisis is almost always unverifiable. Newspapers 
often speak of “personal sorrows” or of “incurable illness.” These 
explanations are plausible. But one would have to know whether a 
friend of the desperate man had not that very day addressed him 
indifferently. He is the guilty one. For that is enough to precipitate 
all the rancors and all the boredom still in suspension.^ 

But if it is hard to fix the precise instant, the subtle step when 
the mind opted for death, it is easier to deduce from the act itself 
the consequences it implies. In a sense, and as in melodrama, 
killing yourself amounts to confessing. It is confessing that life is 
too much for you or that you do not understand it. Let’s not go too 
far in such analogies, however, but rather return to everyday 
words. It is merely confessing that that “is not worth the trouble.” 
Living, naturally, is never easy. You continue making the gestures 
commanded by existence for many reasons, the first of which is 



habit. Dying voluntarily implies that you have recognized, even 
instinc— 

tively, the ridiculous character of that habit, the absence of any 
profound reason for living, the insane character of that daily 
agitation, and the uselessness of suffering. 

What, then, is that incalculable feeling that deprives the mind 
of the sleep necessary to life? A world that can be explained even 
with bad reasons is a familiar world. But, on the other hand, in a 
universe suddenly divested of illusions and lights, man feels an 
alien, a stranger. His exile is without remedy since he is deprived 
of the memory of a lost home or the hope of a promised land. This 
divorce between man and this life, the actor and his setting, is 
properly the feeling of absurdity. All healthy men having thought 
of their own suicide, it can be seen, without further explanation, 
that there is a direct connection between this feeling and the 
longing for death. 

The subject of this essay is precisely this relationship between 
the absurd and suicide, the exact degree to which suicide is a 
solution to the absurd. The principle can be established that for a 
man who does not cheat, what he believes to be true must 
detennine his action. Belief in the absurdity of existence must then 
dictate his conduct. It is legitimate to wonder, clearly and without 
false pathos, whether a conclusion of this importance requires 
forsaking as rapidly as possible an incomprehensible condition. I 
am speaking, of course, of men inclined to be in harmony with 
themselves. 

Stated clearly, this problem may seem both simple and 
insoluble. But it is wrongly assumed that simple questions involve 
answers that are no less simple and that evidence implies evidence. 
A priori and reversing the terms of the problem, just as one does or 
does not kill oneself, it seems that there are but two philosophical 
solutions, either yes or no. This would be too easy. But allowance 
must be made for those who, without concluding, continue 
questioning. Here I am only slightly indulging in irony: this is the 
majority. I notice also that those who answer “no” act as if they 
thought “yes.” As a matter of fact, if I accept the Nietzschean 
criterion, they think “yes” in one way or another. On the other 
hand, it often happens that those who commit suicide were assured 
of the meaning of life. These contradictions are constant. It may 
even be said that they have never been so keen as on this point 
where, on the contrary, logic seems so desirable. It is a 



commonplace to compare philosophical theories and the behavior 
of those who profess them. But it must be said that of the thinkers 
who refused a meaning to life none except Kirilov who belongs to 
literature, Peregrinos who is born of legend, m and Jules Lequier 
who belongs to hypothesis, admitted his logic to the point of 
refusing that life. Schopenhauer is often cited, as a fit subject for 
laughter, because he praised suicide while seated at a well-set 
table. This is no subject for joking. That way of not taking the 
tragic seriously is not so grievous, but it helps to judge a man. 

In the face of such contradictions and obscurities must we 
conclude that there is no relationship between the opinion one has 
about life and the act one commits to leave it? Let us not 
exaggerate in this direction. In a man’s attachment to life there is 
something stronger than all the ills in the world. The body’s 
judgment is as good as the mind’s and the body shrinks from 
annihilation. We get into the habit of living before acquiring the 
habit of thinking. In that race which daily hastens us toward death, 
the body maintains its irreparable lead. In short, the essence of that 
contradiction lies in what I shall call the act of eluding because it is 
both less and more than diversion in the Pascalian sense. Eluding is 
the invariable game. The typical act of eluding, the fatal evasion 
that constitutes the third theme of this essay, is hope. Hope of 
another life one must “deserve” or trickery of those who live not 
for life itself but for some great idea that will transcend it, refine it, 
give it a meaning, and betray it. 

Thus everything contributes to spreading confusion. 

Hitherto, and it has not been wasted effort, people have played 
on words and pretended to believe that refusing to grant a meaning 
to life necessarily leads to declaring that it is not worth living. In 
truth, there is no necessary common measure between these two 
judgments. One merely has to refuse to he misled by the 
confusions, divorces, and inconsistencies previously pointed out. 
One must brush everything aside and go straight to the real 
problem. One kills oneself because life is not worth living, that is 
certainly a truth yet an unfruitful one because it is a truism. But 
does that insult to existence, that flat denial in which it is plunged 
come from the fact that it has no meaning? Does its absurdity 
require one to escape it through hope or suicide—this is what must 
be clarified, hunted down, and elucidated while brushing aside all 
the rest. Does the Absurd dictate death? This problem must be 
given priority over others, outside all methods of thought and all 


exercises of the disinterested mind. Shades of meaning, 
contradictions, the psychology that an “objective” mind can always 
introduce into all problems have no place in this pursuit and this 
passion. It calls simply for an unjust—in other words, logical— 
thought. That is not easy. It is always easy to be logical. It is 
almost impossible to be logical to the bitter end. Men who die by 
their own hand consequently follow to its conclusion their 
emotional inclination. Reflection on suicide gives me an 
opportunity to raise the only problem to interest me: is there a logic 
to the point of death? I cannot know unless I pursue, without 
reckless passion, in the sole light of evidence, the reasoning of 
which I am here suggesting the source. This is what I call an 
absurd reasoning. Many have begun it. I do not yet know whether 
or not they kept to it. 

When Karl Jaspers, revealing the impossibility of constituting 
the world as a unity, exclaims: “This limitation leads me to myself, 
where I can no longer withdraw behind an objective point of view 
that I am merely representing, where neither I myself nor the 
existence of others can any longer become an object for me,” he is 
evoking after many others those waterless deserts where thought 
reaches its confines. After many others, yes indeed, but how eager 
they were to get out of them! At that last crossroad where thought 
hesitates, many men have arrived and even some of the humblest. 
They then abdicated what was most precious to them, their life. 
Others, princes of the mind, abdicated likewise, but they initiated 
the suicide of their thought in its purest revolt. The real effort is to 
stay there, rather, in so far as that is possible, and to examine 
closely the odd vegetation of those distant regions. Tenacity and 
acumen are privileged spectators of this inhuman show in which 
absurdity, hope, and death carry on their dialogue. The mind can 
then analyze the figures of that elementary yet subtle dance before 
illustrating them and reliving them itself. 

Absurd Walls 

Like great works, deep feelings always mean more than they 
are conscious of saying. The regularity of an impulse or a repulsion 
in a soul is encountered again in habits of doing or thinking, is 
reproduced in consequences of which the soul itself knows 
nothing. Great feelings take with them their own universe, splendid 
or abject. They light up with their passion an exclusive world in 
which they recognize their climate. There is a universe of jealousy, 



of ambition, of selfishness, or of generosity. A universe in other 
words, a metaphysic and an attitude of mind. What is true of 
already specialized feelings will be even more so of emotions 
basically as indeterminate, simultaneously as vague and as 
“definite,” as remote and as “present” as those furnished us by 
beauty or aroused by absurdity. 

At any streetcorner the feeling of absurdity can strike any man 
in the face. As it is, in its distressing nudity, in its light without 
effulgence, it is elusive. But that very difficulty deserves reflection. 
It is probably true that a man remains forever unknown to us and 
that there is in him something irreducible that escapes us. But 
practically I know men and recognize them by their behavior, by 
the totality of their deeds, by the consequences caused in life by 
their presence. Likewise, all those irrational feelings which offer 
no purchase to analysis. I can define them practically, appreciate 
them practically, by gathering together the sum of their 
consequences in the domain of the intelligence, by seizing and 
noting all their aspects, by outlining their universe. It is certain that 
apparently, though I have seen the same actor a hundred times, I 
shall not for that reason know him any better personally. Yet if I 
add up the heroes he has personified and if I say that I know him a 
little better at the hundredth character counted off, this will be felt 
to contain an element of truth. For this apparent paradox is also an 
apologue. There is a moral to it. It teaches that a man defines 
himself by his make-believe as well as by his sincere impulses. 
There is thus a lower key of feelings, inaccessible in the heart but 
partially disclosed by the acts they imply and the attitudes of mind 
they assume. It is clear that in this way I am defining a method. 
But it is also evident that that method is one of analysis and not of 
knowledge. For methods imply metaphysics; unconsciously they 
disclose conclusions that they often claim not to know yet. 
Similarly, the last pages of a book are already contained in the first 
pages. Such a link is inevitable. The method defined here 
acknowledges the feeling that all true knowledge is impossible. 
Solely appearances can be enumerated and the climate make itself 
felt. 

Perhaps we shall be able to overtake that elusive feeling of 
absurdity in the different but closely related worlds of intelligence, 
of the art of living, or of art itself. The climate of absurdity is in the 
beginning. The end is the absurd universe and that attitude of mind 
which lights the world with its true colors to bring out the 



privileged and implacable visage which that attitude has discerned 
in it. 

H= * 

All great deeds and all great thoughts have a ridiculous 
beginning. Great works are often born on a street-comer or in a 
restaurant’s revolving door. So it is with absurdity. The absurd 
world more than others derives its nobility from that abject birth. 
In certain situations, replying “nothing” when asked what one is 
thinking about may be pretense in a man. Those who are loved are 
well aware of this. But if that reply is sincere, if it symbolizes that 
odd state of soul in which the void be-comes eloquent, in which 
the chain of daily gestures is broken, in which the heart vainly 
seeks the link that will connect it again, then it is as it were the first 
sign of absurdity. 

It happens that the stage sets collapse. Rising, streetcar, four 
hours in the office or the factory, meal, streetcar, four hours of 
work, meal, sleep, and Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday 
Friday and Saturday accord— 

ing to the same rhythm—this path is easily followed most of 
the time. But one day the “why” arises and everything begins in 
that weariness tinged with amazement. “Begins”—this is 
important. Weariness comes at the end of the acts of a mechanical 
life, but at the same time it inaugurates the impulse of 
consciousness. It awakens consciousness and provokes what 
follows. What follows is the gradual return into the chain or it is 
the definitive awakening. At the end of the awakening comes, in 
time, the consequence: suicide or recovery. In itself weariness has 
something sickening about it. Here, I must conclude that it is good. 
For everything be-gins with consciousness and nothing is worth 
anything except through it. There is nothing original about these 
remarks. But they are obvious; that is enough for a while, during a 
sketchy reconnaissance in the origins of the absurd. Mere 
“anxiety,” as Heidegger says, is at the source of everything. 

Likewise and during every day of an unillustrious life, time 
carries us. But a moment always comes when we have to carry it. 
We live on the future: “tomorrow,” “later on,” “when you have 
made your way,” “you will understand when you are old enough.” 
Such irrelevan-cies are wonderful, for, after all, it’s a matter of 
dying. Yet a day comes when a man notices or says that he is 
thirty. Thus he asserts his youth. But simultaneously he situates 



himself in relation to time. He takes his place in it. He admits that 
he stands at a certain point on a curve that he acknowledges having 
to travel to its end. He belongs to time, and by the horror that 
seizes him, he recognizes his worst enemy. Tomorrow, he was 
longing for tomorrow, whereas everything in him ought to reject it. 
That revolt of the flesh is the absurd. 1 ^ 

A step lower and strangeness creeps in: perceiving that the 
world is “dense,” sensing to what a degree a stone is foreign and 
irreducible to us, with what intensity nature or a landscape can 
negate us. At the heart of all beauty lies something inhuman, and 
these hills, the softness of the sky, the outline of these trees at this 
very minute lose the illusory meaning with which we had clothed 
them, henceforth more remote than a lost paradise. The primitive 
hostility of the world rises up to face us across millennia, for a 
second we cease to understand it because for centuries we have 
understood in it solely the images and designs that we had at¬ 
tributed to it beforehand, because henceforth we lack the power to 
make use of that artifice. The world evades us because it becomes 
itself again. That stage scenery masked by habit becomes again 
what it is. It withdraws at a distance from us. Just as there are days 
when under the familial face of a woman, we see as a stranger her 
we had loved months or years ago, perhaps we shall come even to 
desire what suddenly leaves us so alone. But the time has not yet 
come. Just one thing: that denseness and that strangeness of the 
world is the absurd. 

Men, too, secrete the inhuman. At certain moments of lucidity, 
the mechanical aspect of their gestures, their meaningless 
pantomime makes silly everything that surrounds them. A man is 
talking on the telephone behind a glass partition; you cannot hear 
him, but you see his incomprehensible dumb show: you wonder 
why he is alive. This discomfort in the face of man’s own 
inhumanity, this incalculable tumble before the image of what we 
are, this “nausea,” as a writer of today calls it, is also the absurd. 
Likewise the stranger who at certain seconds comes to meet us in a 
mirror, the familiar and yet alarming brother we encounter in our 
own photographs is also the absurd. 

I come at last to death and to the attitude we have toward it. On 
this point everything has been said and it is only proper to avoid 
pathos. Yet one will never be sufficiently surprised that everyone 
lives as if no one “knew.” This is because in reality there is no 
experience of death. Properly speaking, nothing has been 


experienced but what has been lived and made conscious. Here, it 
is barely possible to speak of the experience of others’ deaths. It is 
a substitute, an illusion, and it never quite convinces us. That 
melancholy convention cannot be persuasive. The horror comes in 
reality from the mathematical aspect of the event. If time frightens 
us, this is because it works out the problem and the solution comes 
afterward. All the pretty speeches about the soul will have their 
contrary convincingly proved, at least for a time. From this inert 
body on which a slap makes no mark the soul has disappeared. 
This elementary and definitive aspect of the adventure constitutes 
the absurd feeling. Under the fatal lighting of that destiny, its 
uselessness becomes evident. No code of ethics and no effort are 
justifiable a priori in the face of the cruel mathematics that 
command our condition. 

Let me repeat: all this has been said over and over. I am 
limiting myself here to making a rapid classification and to 
pointing out these obvious themes. They run through all literatures 
and all philosophies. Everyday conversation feeds on them. There 
is no question of reinventing them. But it is essential to be sure of 
these facts in order to be able to question oneself subsequently on 
the primordial question. I am interested let me repeat again—not 
go much in absurd discoveries as in their consequences. If one is 
assured of these facts, what is one to conclude, how far is one to go 
to elude nothing? Is one to die voluntarily or to hope in spite of 
everything? Beforehand, it is necessary to take the same rapid 
inventory on the plane of the intelligence. 

The mind’s first step is to distinguish what is true from what is 
false. However, as soon as thought reflects on itself, what it first 
discovers is a contradiction. Useless to strive to be convincing in 
this case. Over the centuries no one has furnished a clearer and 
more elegant demonstration of the business than Aristotle: “The 
often ridiculed consequence of these opinions is that they destroy 
themselves. For by asserting that all is true we assert the truth of 
the contrary assertion and consequently the falsity of our own 
thesis (for the contrary assertion does not admit that it can be true). 
And if one says that all is false, that assertion is itself false. If we 
declare that solely the assertion opposed to ours is false or else that 
solely ours is not false, we are nevertheless forced to admit an 
infinite number of true or false judgments. For the one who 



expresses a true assertion proclaims simultaneously that it is true, 
and so on ad infinitum. ” 

This vicious circle is but the first of a series in which the mind 
that studies itself gets lost in a giddy whirling. The very simplicity 
of these paradoxes makes them irreducible. Whatever may be the 
plays on words and the acrobatics of logic, to understand is, above 
all, to unify. The mind’s deepest desire, even in its most elaborate 
operations, parallels man’s unconscious feeling in the face of his 
universe: it is an insistence upon familiarity, an appetite for clarity. 
Understanding the world for a man is reducing it to the human, 
stamping it with his seal. The cat’s universe is not the universe of 
the anthill. The truism “All thought is anthropomorphic” has no 
other meaning. Likewise, the mind that aims to understand reality 
can consider itself satisfied only by reducing it to terms of thought. 
If man realized that the universe like him can love and suffer, he 
would be reconciled. If thought discovered in the shimmering 
mirrors of phenomena eternal relations capable of summing them 
up and summing themselves up in a single principle, then would be 
seen an intellectual joy of which the myth of the blessed would be 
but a ridiculous imitation. That nostalgia for unity, that appetite for 
the absolute illustrates the essential impulse of the human drama. 
But the fact of that nostalgia’s existence does not imply that it is to 
be immediately satisfied. For if, bridging the gulf that separates 
desire from conquest, we assert with Parmenides the reality of the 
One (whatever it may be), we fall into the ridiculous contradiction 
of a mind that asserts total unity and proves by its very assertion its 
own difference and the diversity it claimed to resolve. This other 
vicious circle is enough to stifle our hopes. 

These are again truisms. I shall again repeat that they are not 
interesting in themselves but in the consequences that can be 
deduced from them. I know another truism: it tells me that man is 
mortal. One can nevertheless count the minds that have deduced 
the extreme conclusions from it. It is essential to consider as a 
constant point of reference in this essay the regular hiatus between 
what we fancy we know and what we really know, practical assent 
and simulated ignorance which allows us to live with ideas which, 
if we truly put them to the test, ought to upset our whole life. Faced 
with this inextricable contradiction of the mind, we shall fully 
grasp the divorce separating us from our own creations. So long as 
the mind keeps silent in the motionless world of its hopes, 
everything is reflected and arranged in the unity of its nostalgia. 



But with its first move this world cracks and tumbles: an infinite 
number of shimmering fragments is offered to the understanding. 
We must despair of ever reconstructing the familiar, calm surface 
which would give us peace of heart. After so many centuries of 
inquiries, so many abdications among thinkers, we are well aware 
that this is true for all our knowledge. With the exception of 
professional rationalists, today people despair of true knowledge. If 
the only significant history of human thought were to be written, it 
would have to be the history of its successive regrets and its 
impotences. 

Of whom and of what indeed can I say: “I know that!” This 
heart within me I can feel, and I judge that it exists. This world I 
can touch, and I likewise judge that it exists. There ends all my 
knowledge, and the rest is construction. For if I try to seize this self 
of which I feel sure, if I try to define and to summarize it, it is 
nothing but water slipping through my fingers. I can sketch one by 
one all the aspects it is able to assume, all those likewise that have 
been attributed to it, this upbringing, this origin, this ardor or these 
silences, this nobility or this vileness. But aspects cannot be added 
up. This very heart which is mine will forever remain indefinable 
to me. Between the certainty I have of my existence and the 
content I try to give to that assurance, the gap will never be filled. 
Forever I shall be a stranger to myself. In psychology as in logic, 
there are truths but no truth. Socrates’”Know thyself’ has as much 
value as the “Be virtuous” of our confessionals. They reveal a 
nostalgia at the same time as an ignorance. They are sterile 
exercises on great subjects. They are legitimate only in precisely so 
far as they are approximate. 

And here are trees and I know their gnarled surface, water and 
I feel its taste. These scents of grass and stars at night, certain 
evenings when the heart relaxes—how shall I negate this world 
whose power and strength I feel? Yet all the knowledge on earth 
will give me nothing to assure me that this world is mine. You 
describe it to me and you teach me to classify it. You enumerate its 
laws and in my thirst for knowledge I admit that they are true. You 
take apart its mechanism and my hope increases. At the final stage 
you teach me that this wondrous and multicolored universe can be 
reduced to the atom and that the atom itself can be reduced to the 
electron. All this is good and I wait for you to continue. But you 
tell me of an invisible planetary system in which electrons 
gravitate around a nucleus. You explain this world to me with an 



image. I realize then that you have been reduced to poetry: I shall 
never know. Have I the time to become indignant? You have 
already changed theories. So that science that was to teach me 
everything ends up in a hypothesis, that lucidity founders in 
metaphor, that uncertainty is resolved in a work of art. What need 
had I of so many efforts? The soft lines of these hills and the hand 
of evening on this troubled heart teach me much more. I have 
returned to my beginning. I realize that if through science I can 
seize phenomena and enumerate them, I cannot, for all that, 
apprehend the world. Were I to trace its entire relief with my 
finger, I should not know any more. And you give me the choice 
between a description that is sure but that teaches me nothing and 
hypotheses that claim to teach me but that are not sure. A stranger 
to myself and to the world, armed solely with a thought that 
negates itself as soon as it asserts, what is this condition in which I 
can have peace only by refusing to know and to live, in which the 
appetite for conquest bumps into walls that defy its assaults? To 
will is to stir up paradoxes. Everything is ordered in such a way as 
to bring into being that poisoned peace produced by 
thoughtlessness, lack of heart, or fatal renunciations. 

Hence the intelligence, too, tells me in its way that this world is 
absurd. Its contrary, blind reason, may well claim that all is clear; I 
was waiting for proof and longing for it to be right. But despite so 
many pretentious centuries and over the heads of so many eloquent 
and persuasive men, I know that is false. On this plane, at least, 
there is no happiness if I cannot know. That universal reason, 
practical or ethical, that determinism, those categories that explain 
everything are enough to make a decent man laugh. They have 
nothing to do with the mind. They negate its profound truth, which 
is to be enchained. In this unintelligible and limited universe, 
man’s fate henceforth assumes its meaning. A horde of irrationals 
has sprung up and surrounds him until his ultimate end. In his 
recovered and now studied lucidity, the feeling of the absurd 
becomes clear and definite. I said that the world is absurd, but I 
was too hasty. This world in itself is not reasonable, that is all that 
can be said. But what is absurd is the confrontation of this 
irrational and the wild longing for clarity whose call echoes in the 
human heart. The absurd depends as much on man as on the world. 
For the moment it is all that links them together. It binds them one 
to the other as only hatred can weld two creatures together. This is 
all I can discern clearly in this measureless universe where my 



adventure takes place. Let us pause here. If I hold to be true that 
absurdity that determines my relationship with life, if I become 
thoroughly imbued with that sentiment that seizes me in face of the 
world’s scenes, with that lucidity imposed on me by the pursuit of 
a science, I must sacrifice everything to these certainties and I must 
see them squarely to be able to maintain them. Above all, I must 
adapt my behavior to them and pursue them in all their 
consequences. I am speaking here of decency. But I want to know 
beforehand if thought can live in those deserts. 

* * * 

I already know that thought has at least entered those deserts. 
There it found its bread. There it realized that it had previously 
been feeding on phantoms. It justified some of the most urgent 
themes of human reflection. 

From the moment absurdity is recognized, it becomes a 
passion, the most harrowing of all. But whether or not one can live 
with one’s passions, whether or not one can accept their law, 
which is to bum the heart they simultaneously exalt—that is the 
whole question. It is not, however, the one we shall ask just yet. It 
stands at the center of this experience. There will be time to come 
back to it. Let us recognize rather those themes and those impulses 
bom of the desert. It will suffice to enumerate them. They, too, are 
kn own to all today. There have always been men to defend the 
rights of the irrational. The tradition of what may be called 
humiliated thought has never ceased to exist. The criticism of 
rationalism has been made so often that it seems unnecessary to 
begin again. Yet our epoch is marked by the rebirth of those 
paradoxical systems that strive to trip up the reason as if truly it 
had always forged ahead. But that is not so much a proof of the 
efficacy of the reason as of the intensity of its hopes. On the plane 
of history, such a constancy of two attitudes illustrates the essential 
passion of man tom between his urge toward unity and the clear 
vision he may have of the walls enclosing him. 

But never perhaps at any time has the attack on reason been 
more violent than in ours. Since Zarathustra’s great outburst: “By 
chance it is the oldest nobility in the world. I conferred it upon all 
things when I proclaimed that above them no eternal will was 
exercised,” since Kierkegaard’s fatal illness, “that malady that 
leads to death with nothing else following it,” the significant and 
tormenting themes of absurd thought have followed one another. 



Or at least, and this proviso is of capital importance, the themes of 
irrational and religious thought. From Jaspers to Heidegger, from 
Kierkegaard to Che-stov, from the phenomenologists to Scheler, 
on the logical plane and on the moral plane, a whole family of 
minds related by their nostalgia but opposed by their methods or 
their aims, have persisted in blocking the royal road of reason and 
in recovering the direct paths of truth. Here I assume these 
thoughts to be known and lived. Whatever may be or have been 
their ambitions, all started out from that indescribable universe 
where contradiction, antinomy, anguish, or impotence reigns. And 
what they have in common is precisely the themes so far disclosed. 
For them, too, it must be said that what matters above all is the 
conclusions they have managed to draw from those discoveries. 
That matters so much that they must be examined separately. But 
for the moment we are concerned solely with their discoveries and 
their initial experiments. We are concerned solely with noting their 
agreement. If it would be presumptuous to try to deal with their 
philosophies, it is possible and sufficient in any case to bring out 
the climate that is common to them. 

Heidegger considers the human condition coldly and 
announces that that existence is humiliated. The only reality is 
“anxiety” in the whole chain of beings. To the man lost in the 
world and its diversions this anxiety is a brief, fleeting fear. But if 
that fear becomes conscious of itself, it becomes anguish, the 
perpetual climate of the lucid man “in whom existence is 
concentrated.” This professor of philosophy writes without 
trembling and in the most abstract language in the world that “the 
finite and limited character of human existence is more primordial 
than man himself.” His interest in Kant extends only to 
recognizing the restricted character of his “pure Reason.” This is to 
coincide at the end of his analyses that “the world can no longer 
offer anything to the man filled with anguish.” This anxiety seems 
to him so much more important than all the categories in the world 
that he thinks and talks only of it. He enumerates its aspects: 
boredom when the ordinary man strives to quash it in him and 
benumb it; terror when the mind contemplates death. He too does 
not separate consciousness from the absurd. The consciousness of 
death is the call of anxiety and “existence then delivers itself its 
own summons through the intermediary of consciousness.” It is the 
very voice of anguish and it adjures existence “to return from its 
loss in the anonymous They.” For him, too, one must not sleep, but 



must keep alert until the consummation. He stands in this absurd 
world and points out its ephemeral character. He seeks his way 
amid these ruins. 

Jaspers despairs of any ontology because he claims that we 
have lost “naivete.” He knows that we can achieve nothing that 
will transcend the fatal game of appearances. He knows that the 
end of the mind is failure. He tarries over the spiritual adventures 
revealed by history and pitilessly discloses the flaw in each system, 
the illusion that saved everything, the preaching that hid nothing. 
In this ravaged world in which the impossibility of knowledge is 
established, in which everlasting nothingness seems the only 
reality and irremediable despair seems the only attitude, he tries to 
recover the Ariadne’s thread that leads to divine secrets. 

Chestov, for his part, throughout a wonderfully monotonous 
work, constantly straining toward the same truths, tirelessly 
demonstrates that the tightest system, the most universal 
rationalism always stumbles eventually on the irrational of human 
thought. None of the ironic facts or ridiculous contradictions that 
depreciate the reason escapes him. One thing only interests him, 
and that is the exception, whether in the domain of the heart or of 
the mind. Through the Dostoevskian experiences of the 
condemned man, the exacerbated adventures of the Nietzschean 
mind, Hamlet’s imprecations, or the bitter aristocracy of an Ibsen, 
he tracks down, il-luminates, and magnifies the human revolt 
against the irremediable. He refuses the reason its reasons and 
begins to advance with some decision only in the middle of that 
colorless desert where all certainties have become stones. 

Of all perhaps the most engaging, Kierkegaard, for a part of his 
existence at least, does more than discover the absurd, he lives it. 
The man who writes: “The surest of stubborn silences is not to 
hold one’s tongue but to talk” makes sure in the beginning that no 
truth is absolute or can render satisfactory an existence that is 
impossible in itself. Don Juan of the understanding, he multiplies 
pseudonyms and contradictions, writes his Discourses of 
Edification at the same time as that manual of cynical spiritualism, 
The Diary of the Seducer. He refuses consolations, ethics, reliable 
principles. As for that thorn he feels in his heart, he is careful not 
to quiet its pain. On the contrary, he awakens it and, in the 
desperate joy of a man crucified and happy to be so, he builds up 
piece by piece—lucidity, refusal, make believe—a category of the 
man possessed. That face both tender and sneering, those 



pirouettes followed by a cry from the heart are the absurd spirit 
itself grappling with a reality beyond its comprehension. And the 
spiritual adventure that leads Kierkegaard to his beloved scandals 
begins likewise in the chaos of an experience divested of its setting 
and relegated to its original incoherence. 

On quite a different plane, that of method, Husserl and the 
phenomenologists, by their very extravagances, reinstate the world 
in its diversity and deny the transcendent power of the reason. The 
spiritual universe becomes incalculably enriched through them. 
The rose petal, the milestone, or the human hand are as important 
as love, desire, or the laws of gravity. Thinking ceases to be 
unifying or making a semblance familiar in the guise of a major 
principle. Thinking is learning all over again to see, to be attentive, 
to focus consciousness; it is turning every idea and every image, in 
the manner of Proust, into a privileged moment. What justifies 
thought is its extreme consciousness. Though more positive than 
Kierkegaard’s or Chestov’s, Husserl’s manner of proceeding, in 
the beginning, nevertheless negates the classic method of the 
reason, disappoints hope, opens to intuition and to the heart a 
whole proliferation of phenomena, the wealth of which has about it 
something inhuman. These paths lead to all sciences or to none. 
This amounts to saying that in this case the means are more 
important than the end. All that is involved is “an attitude for 
understanding” and not a consolation. Let me repeat: in the 
beginning, at very least. 

How can one fail to feel the basic relationship of these minds! 
How can one fail to see that they take their stand around a 
privileged and bitter moment in which hope has no further place? I 
want everything to be explained to me or nothing. And the reason 
is impotent when it hears this cry from the heart. The mind aroused 
by this insistence seeks and finds nothing but contradictions and 
nonsense. What I fail to understand is nonsense. The world is 
peopled with such irrationals. The world itself, whose single 
meaning I do not understand, is but a vast irrational. If one could 
only say just once: “This is clear,” all would be saved. But these 
men vie with one another in proclaiming that nothing is clear, all is 
chaos, that all man has is his lucidity and his definite knowledge of 
the walls surrounding him. 

All these experiences agree and confirm one another. The 
mind, when it reaches its limits, must make a judgment and choose 
its conclusions. This is where suicide and the reply stand. But I 



wish to reverse the order of the inquiry and start out from the 
intelligent adventure and come back to daily acts. The experiences 
called to mind here were born in the desert that we must not leave 
behind. At least it is essential to know how far they went. At this 
point of his effort man stands face to face with the irrational. He 
feels within him his longing for happiness and for reason. The 
absurd is born of this confrontation between the human need and 
the unreasonable silence of the world. This must not be forgotten. 
This must be clung to because the whole consequence of a life can 
depend on it. The irrational, the human nostalgia, and the absurd 
that is bom of their encounter—these are the three characters in the 
drama that must necessarily end with all the logic of which an 
existence is capable. 

Philosophical Suicide 

The feeling of the absurd is not, for all that, the notion of the 
absurd. It lays the foundations for it, and that is all. It is not limited 
to that notion, except in the brief moment when it passes judgment 
on the universe. Subsequently it has a chance of going further. It is 
alive; in other words, it must die or else reverberate. So it is with 
the themes we have gathered together. But there again what 
interests me is not works or minds, criticism of which would call 
for another form and another place, but the discovery of what their 
conclusions have in common. Never, perhaps, have minds been so 
different. And yet we recognize as identical the spiritual 
landscapes in which they get under way. Likewise, despite such 
dissimilar zones of knowledge, the cry that terminates their 
itinerary rings out in the same way. It is evident that the thinkers 
we have just recalled have a common climate. 

To say that that climate is deadly scarcely amounts to playing 
on words. Living under that stifling sky forces one to get away or 
to stay. The important thing is to find out how people get away in 
the first case and why people stay in the second case. This is how I 
define the problem of suicide and the possible interest in the 
conclusions of existential philosophy. 

But first I want to detour from the direct path. Up to now we 
have managed to circumscribe the absurd from the outside. One 
can, however, wonder how much is clear in that notion and by 
direct analysis try to discover its meaning on the one hand and, on 
the other, the consequences it involves. 



If I accuse an innocent man of a monstrous crime, if I tell a 
virtuous man that he has coveted his own sister, he will reply that 
this is absurd. His indignation has its comical aspect. But it also 
has its fundamental reason. The virtuous man illustrates by that 
reply the definitive antinomy existing between the deed I am 
attributing to him and his lifelong principles. “It’s absurd” means 
“It’s impossible” but also “It’s contradictory.” If I see a man armed 
only with a sword attack a group of machine guns, I shall consider 
his act to be absurd. But it is so solely by virtue of the 
disproportion between his intention and the reality he will 
encounter, of the contradiction I notice between his true strength 
and the aim he has in view. Likewise we shall deem a verdict 
absurd when we contrast it with the verdict the facts apparently 
dictated. And, similarly, a demonstration by the absurd is achieved 
by comparing the consequences of such a reasoning with the 
logical reality one wants to set up. In all these cases, from the 
simplest to the most complex, the magnitude of the absurdity will 
be in direct ratio to the distance between the two terms of my 
comparison. There are absurd marriages, challenges, rancors, 
silences, wars, and even peace treaties. For each of them the 
absurdity springs from a comparison. I am thus justified in saying 
that the feeling of absurdity does not spring from the mere scrutiny 
of a fact or an impression, but that it bursts from the comparison 
between a bare fact and a certain reality, between an action and the 
world that transcends it. The absurd is essentially a divorce. It lies 
in neither of the elements compared; it is born of their 
confrontation. 

In this particular case and on the plane of intelligence, I can 
therefore say that the Absurd is not in man (if such a metaphor 
could have a meaning) nor in the world, but in their presence 
together. For the moment it is the only bond uniting them. If wish 
to limit myself to facts, I know what man wants, I know what the 
world offers him, and now I can say that I also know what li nk s 
them. I have no need to dig deeper. A single certainty is enough for 
the seeker. He simply has to derive all the consequences from it. 

The immediate consequence is also a rule of method. The odd 
trinity brought to light in this way is certainly not a startling 
discovery. But it resembles the data of experience in that it is both 
infinitely simple and infinitely complicated. Its first distinguishing 
feature in this regard is that it cannot be divided. To destroy one of 
its terms is to destroy the whole. There can be no absurd outside 



the human mind. Thus, like everything else, the absurd ends with 
death. But there can be no absurd outside this world either. And it 
is by this elementary criterion that I judge the notion of the absurd 
to be essential and consider that it can stand as the first of my 
truths. The rule of method alluded to above appears here. If I judge 
that a thing is true, I must preserve it. If I attempt to solve a 
problem, at least I must not by that very solution conjure away one 
of the terms of the problem. For me the sole datum is the absurd. 
The first and, after all, the only condition of my inquiry is to 
preserve the very thing that crushes me, consequently to respect 
what I consider essential in it. I have just defined it as a 
confrontation and an unceasing struggle. 

And carrying this absurd logic to its conclusion, I must admit 
that that struggle implies a total absence of hope (which has 
nothing to do with despair), a continual rejection (which must not 
be confused with renunciation), and a conscious dissatisfaction 
(which must not be compared to immature unrest). Everything that 
destroys, conjures away, or exorcises these requirements (and, to 
begin with, consent which overthrows divorce) ruins the absurd 
and devaluates the attitude that may then be proposed. The absurd 
has meaning only in so far as it is not agreed to. 

There exists an obvious fact that seems utterly moral: namely, 
that a man is always a prey to his truths. Once he has admitted 
them, he cannot free himself from them. One has to pay something. 
A man who has be-come conscious of the absurd is forever bound 
to it. A man devoid of hope and conscious of being so has ceased 
to belong to the future. That is natural. But it is just as natural that 
he should strive to escape the universe of which he is the creator. 
All the foregoing has significance only on account of this paradox. 
Certain men, starting from a critique of rationalism, have admitted 
the absurd climate. Nothing is more instructive in this regard than 
to scrutinize the way in which they have elaborated their 
consequences. 

Now, to limit myself to existential philosophies, I see that all of 
them without exception suggest escape. Through an odd reasoning, 
starting out from the absurd over the ruins of reason, in a closed 
universe limited to the human, they deify what crushes them and 
find reason to hope in what impoverishes them. That forced hope is 
religious in all of them. It deserves attention. 



I shall merely analyze here as examples a few themes dear to 
Chestov and Kierkegaard. But Jaspers will provide us, in 
caricatural form, a typical example of this attitude. As a result the 
rest will be clearer. He is left powerless to realize the transcendent, 
incapab le of plumbing the depth of experience, and conscious of 
that universe upset by failure. Will he advance or at least draw the 
conclusions from that failure? He contributes nothing new. He has 
found nothing in experience but the confession of his own 
impotence and no occasion to infer any satisfactory principle. Yet 
without justification, as he says to himself, he suddenly asserts all 
at once the transcendent, the essence of experience, and the 
superhuman significance of life when he writes: “Does not the 
failure reveal, beyond any possible explanation and interpretation, 
not the absence but the existence of transcendence?” That 
existence which, suddenly and through a blind act of human 
confidence, explains everything, he defines as “the unthinkable 
unity of the general and the particular.” Thus the absurd becomes 
god (in the broadest meaning of this word) and that inability to 
understand becomes the existence that illuminates everything. 
Nothing logically prepares this reasoning. I can call it a leap. And 
para-doxically can be understood Jaspers’s insistence, his infinite 
patience devoted to making the experience of the transcendent 
impossible to realize. For the more fleeting that approximation is, 
the more empty that definition proves to be, and the more real that 
transcendent is to him; for the passion he devotes to asserting it is 
in direct proportion to the gap between his powers of explanation 
and the irrationality of the world and of experience. It thus appears 
that the more bitterly Jaspers destroys the reason’s preconceptions, 
the more radically he will explain the world. That apostle of 
humiliated thought will find at the very end of humiliation the 
means of regenerating being to its very depth. 

Mystical thought has familiarized us with such devices. They 
are just as legitimate as any attitude of mind. But for the moment I 
am acting as if I took a certain problem seriously. Without judging 
beforehand the general value of this attitude or its educative power, 
I mean simply to consider whether it answers the conditions I set 
myself, whether it is worthy of the conflict that concerns me. Thus 
I return to Chestov. A commentator relates a remark of his that 
deserves interest: 

“The only true solution,” he said, “is precisely where human 
judgment sees no solution. Otherwise, what need would we have of 



God? We turn toward God only to obtain the impossible. As for 
the possible, men suffice.” If there is a Chestovian philosophy, I 
can say that it is altogether summed up in this way. For when, at 
the conclusion of his passionate analyses, Chestov discovers the 
fundamental absurdity of all existence, he does not say: “This is 
the absurd,” but rather: “This is God: we must rely on him even if 
he does not correspond to any of our rational categories.” So that 
confusion may not be possible, the Russian philosopher even hints 
that this God is perhaps full of hatred and hateful, 
incomprehensible and contradictory; but the more hideous is his 
face, the more he asserts his power. His greatness is his 
incoherence. His proof is his inhumanity. One must spring into him 
and by this leap free oneself from rational illusions. Thus, for 
Chestov acceptance of the absurd is contemporaneous with the 
absurd itself. Being aware of it amounts to accepting it, and the 
whole logical effort of his thought is to bring it out so that at the 
same time the tremendous hope it involves may burst forth. Let me 
repeat that this attitude is legitimate. But I am persisting here in 
considering a single problem and all its consequences. I do not 
have to examine the emotion of a thought or of an act of faith. I 
have a whole lifetime to do that. I know that the rationalist finds 
Chestov’s attitude annoying. But I also feel that Chestov is right 
rather than the rationalist, and I merely want to know if he remains 
faithful to the commandments of the absurd. 

Now, if it is admitted that the absurd is the contrary of hope, it 
is seen that existential thought for Chestov presupposes the absurd 
but proves it only to dispel it. Such subtlety of thought is a 
conjuror’s emotional trick. When Chestov elsewhere sets his 
absurd in opposition to current morality and reason, he calls it truth 
and redemption. Hence, there is basically in that definition of the 
absurd an approbation that Chestov grants it. If it is admitted that 
all the power of that notion lies in the way it runs counter to our 
elementary hopes, if it is felt that to remain, the absurd requires not 
to be consented to, then it can be clearly seen that it has lost its true 
aspect, its human and relative character in order to enter an eternity 
that is both incomprehensible and satisfying. If there is an absurd, 
it is in man’s universe. The moment the notion transforms itself 
into eternity’s springboard, it ceases to be linked to human lucidity. 
The absurd is no longer that evidence that man ascertains without 
consenting to it. The struggle is eluded. Man integrates the absurd 
and in that communion causes to disappear its essential character, 



which is opposition, laceration, and divorce. This leap is an escape. 
Chestov, who is so fond of quoting Hamlet’s remark: “The time is 
out of joint,” writes it down with a sort of savage hope that seems 
to belong to him in particular. For it is not in this sense that Hamlet 
says it or Shakespeare writes it. The intoxication of the irrational 
and the vocation of rapture turn a lucid mind away from the 
absurd. To Chestov reason is useless but there is something beyond 
reason. To an absurd mind reason is useless and there is nothing 
beyond reason. 

This leap can at least enlighten us a little more as to the true 
nature of the absurd. We know that it is worthless except in an 
equilibrium, that it is, above all, in the comparison and not in the 
terms of that comparison. But it so happens that Chestov puts all 
the emphasis on one of the terms and destroys the equilibrium. Our 
appetite for understanding, our nostalgia for the absolute are 
explicable only in so far, precisely, as we can understand and 
explain many things. It is useless to negate the reason absolutely. It 
has its order in which it is efficacious. It is properly that of human 
experience. Whence we wanted to make everything clear. If we 
cannot do so, if the absurd is born on that occasion, it is born 
precisely at the very meeting-point of that efficacious but limited 
reason with the ever resurgent irrational. Now, when Chestov rises 
up against a Hegelian proposition such as “the motion of the solar 
system takes place in conformity with immutable laws and those 
laws are its reason,” when he devotes all his passion to upsetting 
Spinoza’s rationalism, he concludes, in effect, in favor of the 
vanity of all reason. Whence, by a natural and illegitimate reversal, 
to the pre-eminence of the irrational.^ But the transition is not 
evident. For here may intervene the notion of limit and the notion 
of level. The laws of nature may be operative up to a certain limit, 
beyond which they turn against themselves to give birth to the 
absurd. Or else, they may justify themselves on the level of 
description without for that reason being true on the level of 
explanation. 

Everything is sacrificed here to the irrational, and, the demand 
for clarity being conjured away, the absurd disappears with one of 
the terms of its comparison. The absurd man, on the other hand, 
does not undertake such a leveling process. He recognizes the 
struggle, does not absolutely scorn reason, and admits the 
irrational. Thus he again embraces in a single glance all the data of 
experience and he is little inclined to leap before knowing. He 


knows simply that in that alert awareness there is no further place 
for hope. 

What is perceptible in Leo Chestov will be perhaps even more 
so in Kierkegaard. To be sure, it is hard to outline clear 
propositions in so elusive a writer. But, despite apparently opposed 
writings, beyond the pseudonyms, the tricks, and the smiles, can be 
felt throughout that work, as it were, the presentiment (at the same 
time as the apprehension) of a truth which eventually bursts forth 
in the last works: Kierkegaard likewise takes the leap. His 
childhood having been so frightened by Christianity, he ultimately 
returns to its harshest aspect. For him, too, antinomy and paradox 
become criteria of the religious. Thus, the very thing that led to 
despair of the meaning and depth of this life now gives it its truth 
and its clarity. Christianity is the scandal, and what Kierkegaard 
calls for quite plainly is the third sacrifice required by Ignatius 
Loyola, the one in which God most rejoices: “The sacrifice of the 
intellect.” ^ 

This effect of the “leap” is odd, but must not surprise us any 
longer. He makes of the absurd the criterion of the other world, 
whereas it is simply a residue of the experience of this world. “In 
his failure,” says Kierkegaard, “the believer finds his triumph.” 

It is not for me to wonder to what stirring preaching this 
attitude is linked. I merely have to wonder if the spectacle of the 
absurd and its own character justifies it. On this point, I kn ow that 
it is not so. Upon considering again the content of the absurd, one 
understands better the method that inspired Kierkegaard. Between 
the irrational of the world and the insurgent nostalgia of the absurd, 
he does not maintain the equilibrium. He does not respect the 
relationship that constitutes, properly speaking, the feeling of 
absurdity. Sure of being unable to escape the irrational, he wants at 
least to save himself from that desperate nostalgia that seems to 
him sterile and devoid of implication. But if he may be right on 
this point in his judgment, he could not be in his negation. If he 
substitutes for his cry of revolt a frantic adherence, at once he is 
led to blind himself to the absurd which hitherto enlightened him 
and to deify the only certainty he henceforth possesses, the 
irrational. The important thing, as Abbe Galiani said to Mine 
d’Epinay, is not to be cured, but to live with one’s ailments. 
Kierkegaard wants to be cured. To be cured is his frenzied wish, 
and it runs throughout his whole journal. The entire effort of his 
intelligence is to escape the antinomy of the human condition. An 


all the more desperate effort since he intermittently perceives its 
vanity when he speaks of himself, as if neither fear of God nor 
piety were capable of bringing him to peace. Thus it is that, 
through a strained subterfuge, he gives the irrational the 
appearance and God the attributes of the absurd: unjust, 
incoherent, and incomprehensible. Intelligence alone in him strives 
to stifle the underlying demands of the human heart. Since nothing 
is proved, everything can be proved. 

Indeed, Kierkegaard himself shows us the path taken. I do not 
want to suggest anything here, but how can one fail to read in his 
works the signs of an almost intentional mutilation of the soul to 
balance the mutilation accepted in regard to the absurd? It is the 
leitmotiv of the Journal. “What I lacked was the animal which also 
belongs to human destiny .... But give me a body then.” And 
further on: “Oh! especially in my early youth what should I not 
have given to be a man, even for six months ... what I lack, 
basically, is a body and the physical conditions of existence.” 
Elsewhere, the same man nevertheless adopts the great cry of hope 
that has come down through so many centuries and quickened so 
many hearts, except that of the absurd man. “But for the Christian 
death is certainly not the end of everything and it implies infinitely 
more hope than life implies for us, even when that life is 
overflowing with health and vigor.” Reconciliation through 
scandal is still reconciliation. It allows one perhaps, as can be seen, 
to derive hope of its contrary, which is death. But even if fellow- 
feeling inclines one toward that attitude, still it must be said that 
excess justifies nothing. That transcends, as the saying goes, the 
human scale; therefore it must be superhuman. But this “therefore” 
is superfluous. There is no logical certainty here. There is no 
experimental probability either. All I can say is that, in fact, that 
transcends my scale. If I do not draw a negation from it, at least I 
do not want to found anything on the incomprehensible. I want to 
know whether I can live with what I know and with that alone. I 
am told again that here the intelligence must sacrifice its pride and 
the reason bow down. But if I recognize the limits of the reason, I 
do not therefore negate it, recognizing its relative powers. I merely 
want to remain in this middle path where the intelligence can 
remain clear. If that is its pride, I see no sufficient reason for 
giving it up. Nothing more profound, for example, than 
Kierkegaard’s view according to which despair is not a fact but a 
state: the very state of sin. For sin is what alienates from God. The 



absurd, which is the metaphysical state of the conscious man, does 
not lead to God. m Perhaps this notion will become clearer if I risk 
this shocking statement: the absurd is sin without God. 

It is a matter of living in that state of the absurd I kn ow on 
what it is founded, this mind and this world straining against each 
other without being able to embrace each other. I ask for the rule— 
of life of that state, and what I am offered neglects its basis, 
negates one of the terms of the painful opposition, demands of me 
a resignation. I ask what is involved in the condition I recognize as 
mine; I kn ow it implies obscurity and ignorance; and I am assured 
that this ignorance explains everything and that this darkness is my 
light. But there is no reply here to my intent, and this stirring 
lyricism cannot hide the paradox from me. One must therefore turn 
away. Kierkegaard may shout in warning: “If man had no eternal 
consciousness, if, at the bottom of everything, there were merely a 
wild, seething force producing everything, both large and trifling, 
in the storm of dark passions, if the bottomless void that nothing 
can fill underlay all things, what would life be but despair?” This 
cry is not likely to stop the absurd man. Seeking what is true is not 
seeking what is desirable. If in order to elude the anxious question: 
“What would life be?” one must, like the donkey, feed on the roses 
of illusion, then the absurd mind, rather than resigning itself to 
falsehood, prefers, to adopt fearlessly Kierkegaard’s reply: 
“despair.” Everything considered, a determined soul will always 
manage. 

*** 

I am taking the liberty at this point of calling the existential 
attitude philosophical suicide. But this does not imply a judgment. 
It is a convenient way of indicating the movement by which a 
thought negates itself and tends to transcend itself in its very 
negation. For the existentials negation is their God. To be precise, 
that god is maintained only through the negation of human 
reason. 1 ^ But, like suicides, gods change with men. There are 
many ways of leaping, the essential being to leap. Those 
redeeming negations, those ultimate contradictions which negate 
the obstacle that has not yet been leaped over, may spring just as 
well (this is the paradox at which this reasoning aims) from a 
certain religious inspiration as from the rational order. They always 
lay claim to the eternal, and it is solely in this that they take the 
leap. 


It must be repeated that the reasoning developed in this essay 
leaves out altogether the most widespread spiritual attitude of our 
enlightened age: the one, based on the principle that all is reason, 
which aims to explain the world. It is natural to give a clear view 
of the world after accepting the idea that it must be clear. That is 
even legitimate, but does not concern the reasoning we are 
following out here. In fact, our aim is to shed light upon the step 
taken by the mind when, starting from a philosophy of the world’s 
lack of meaning, it ends up by finding a meaning and depth in it. 
The most touching of those steps is religious in essence; it 
becomes obvious in the theme of the irrational. But the most 
paradoxical and most significant is certainly the one that attributes 
rational reasons to a world it originally imagined as devoid of any 
guiding principle. It is impossible in any case to reach the 
consequences that concern us without having given an idea of this 
new attainment of the spirit of nostalgia. 

I shall examine merely the theme of “the Intention” made 
fashionable by Husserl and the phenomenologists. I have already 
alluded to it. Originally Husserl’s method negates the classic 
procedure of the reason. Let me repeat. Thinking is not unifying or 
making the appearance familiar under the guise of a great 
principle. Thinking is learning all over again how to see, directing 
one’s consciousness, making of every image a privileged place. In 
other words, phenomenology declines to explain the world, it 
wants to be merely a description of actual experience. It confirms 
absurd thought in its initial assertion that there is no truth, but 
merely truths. From the evening breeze to this hand on my 
shoulder, everything has its truth. Consciousness illuminates it by 
paying attention to it. Consciousness does not form the object of its 
understanding, it merely focuses, it is the act of attention, and, to 
borrow a Bergsonian image, it resembles the projector that 
suddenly focuses on an image. The difference is that there is no 
scenario, but a successive and incoherent illustration. In that magic 
lantern all the pictures are privileged. Consciousness suspends in 
experience the objects of its attention. Through its miracle it 
isolates them. Henceforth they are beyond all judgments. This is 
the “intention” that characterizes consciousness. But the word does 
not imply any idea of finality; it is taken in its sense of “direction”: 
its only value is topographical. 

At first sight, it certainly seems that in this way nothing 
contradicts the absurd spirit. That apparent modesty of thought that 



limits itself to describing what it declines to explain, that 
intentional discipline whence results paradoxically a profound 
enrichment of experience and the rebirth of the world in its 
prolixity are absurd procedures. At least at first sight. For methods 
of thought, in this case as elsewhere, always assume two aspects, 
one psychological and the other metaphysical.^ Thereby they 
harbor two truths. If the theme of the intentional claims to illustrate 
merely a psychological attitude, by which reality is drained instead 
of being explained, nothing in fact separates it from the absurd 
spirit. It aims to enumerate what it cannot transcend. It affirms 
solely that without any unifying principle thought can still take 
delight in describing and understanding every aspect of experience. 
The truth involved then for each of those aspects is psychological 
in nature. It simply testifies to the “interest” that reality can offer. 
It is a way of awaking a sleeping world and of making it vivid to 
the mind. But if one attempts to extend and give a rational basis to 
that notion of truth, if one claims to discover in this way the 
“essence” of each object of knowledge, one restores its depth to 
experience. For an absurd mind that is incomprehensible. Now, it 
is this wavering between modesty and assurance that is noticeable 
in the intentional attitude, and this shimmering of 
phenomenological thought will illustrate the absurd reasoning 
better than anything else. 

For Husserl speaks likewise of “extra-temporal essences” 
brought to light by the intention, and he sounds like Plato. All 
things are not explained by one thing but by all things. I see no 
difference. To be sure, those ideas or those essences that 
consciousness “effectuates” at the end of every description are not 
yet to be considered perfect models. But it is asserted that they are 
directly present in each datum of perception. There is no longer a 
single idea explaining everything, but an infinite number of 
essences giving a meaning to an infinite number of objects. The 
world comes to a stop, but also lights up. Platonic realism becomes 
intuitive, but it is still realism. Kierkegaard was swallowed up in 
his God; Parmenides plunged thought into the One. But here 
thought hurls itself into an abstract polytheism. But this is not all: 
hallucinations and fictions likewise belong to “extra-temporal 
essences.” In the new world of ideas, the species of centaurs 
collaborates with the more modest species of metropolitan man. 

For the absurd man, there was a truth as well as a bitterness in 
that purely psychological opinion that all aspects of the world are 


privileged. To say that everything is privileged is tantamount to 
saying that everything is equivalent. But the metaphysical aspect of 
that truth is so far-reaching that through an elementary reaction he 
feels closer perhaps to Plato. He is taught, in fact, that every image 
presupposes an equally privileged essence. In this ideal world 
without hierarchy, the formal army is composed solely of generals. 
To be sure, transcendency had been eliminated. But a sudden shift 
in thought brings back into the world a sort of fragmentary 
immanence which restores to the universe its depth. 

Am I to fear having carried too far a theme handled with 
greater circumspection by its creators? I read merely these 
assertions of Husserl, apparently paradoxical yet rigorously logical 
if what precedes is accepted: “That which is true is true absolutely, 
in itself; truth is one, identical with itself, however different the 
creatures who perceive it, men, monsters, angels or gods.” Reason 
triumphs and trumpets forth with that voice, I cannot deny. What 
can its assertions mean in the absurd world? The perception of an 
angel or a god has no meaning for me. That geometrical spot 
where divine reason ratifies mine will always be incomprehensible 
to me. There, too, I discern a leap, and though performed in the 
abstract, it nonetheless means for me forgetting just what I do not 
want to forget. When farther on Husserl exclaims: “If all masses 
subject to attraction were to disappear, the law of attraction would 
not be destroyed but would simply remain without any possible 
application,” I know that I am faced with a metaphysic of 
consolation. And if I want to discover the point where thought 
leaves the path of evidence, I have only to reread the parallel 
reasoning that Husserl voices regarding the mind: “If we could 
contemplate clearly the exact laws of psychic processes, they 
would be seen to be likewise eternal and invariable, like the basic 
laws of theoretical natural science. Hence they would be valid even 
if there were no psychic process.” Even if the mind were not, its 
laws would be! I see then that of a psychological truth Husserl 
aims to make a rational rule: after having denied the integrating 
power of human reason, he leaps by this expedient to eternal 
Reason. 

Husserl’s theme of the “concrete universe” cannot then surprise 
me. If I am told that all essences are not formal but that some are 
material, that the first are the object of logic and the second of 
science, this is merely a question of definition. The abstract, I am 
told, indicates but a part, without consistency in itself, of a 



concrete universal. But the wavering already noted allows me to 
throw light on the confusion of these terms. For that may mean that 
the concrete object of my attention, this sky, the reflection of that 
water on this coat, alone preserve the prestige of the real that my 
interest isolates in the world. And I shall not deny it. But that may 
mean also that this coat itself is universal, has its particular and 
sufficient essence, belongs to the world of forms. 1 then realize that 
merely the order of the procession has been changed. This world 
has ceased to have its reflection in a higher universe, but the 
heaven of forms is figured in the host of images of this earth. This 
changes nothing for me. Rather than encountering here a taste for 
the concrete, the meaning of the human condition, I find an 
intellectualism sufficiently unbridled to generalize the concrete 
itself. 

It is futile to be amazed by the apparent paradox that leads 
thought to its own negation by the opposite paths of humiliated 
reason and triumphal reason. From the abstract god of Husserl to 
the dazzling god of Kierkegaard the distance is not so great. 
Reason and the irrational lead to the same preaching. In truth the 
way matters but little; the will to arrive suffices. The abstract 
philosopher and the religious philosopher start out from the same 
disorder and support each other in the same anxiety. But the 
essential is to explain. Nostalgia is stronger here than knowledge. 
It is significant that the thought of the epoch is at once one of the 
most deeply imbued with a philosophy of the non-significance of 
the world and one of the most divided in its conclusions. It is 
constantly oscillating between extreme rationalization of reality 
which tends to break up that thought into standard reasons and its 
extreme irrationalization which tends to deify it. But this divorce is 
only apparent. It is a matter of reconciliation, and, in both cases, 
the leap suffices. It is always wrongly thought that the notion of 
reason is a oneway notion. To tell the truth, however rigorous it 
may be in its ambition, this concept is nonetheless just as unstable 
as others. Reason bears a quite human aspect, but it also is able to 
turn toward the divine. Since Plotinus, who was the first to 
reconcile it with the eternal climate, it has learned to turn away 
from the most cherished of its principles, which is contradiction, in 
order to integrate into it the strangest, the quite magic one of 



participation. 1 ^ 1 It is an instrument of thought and not thought 
itself. Above all, a man’s thought is his nostalgia. 

Just as reason was able to soothe the melancholy of Plotinus, it 
provides modern anguish the means of calming itself in the 
familiar setting of the eternal. The absurd mind has less luck. For it 
the world is neither so rational nor so irrational. It is unreasonable 
and only that. With Husserl the reason eventually has no limits at 
all. The absurd, on the contrary, establishes its lim-its since it is 
powerless to calm its anguish. Kierkegaard independently asserts 
that a single limit is enough to negate that anguish. But the absurd 
does not go so far. For it that limit is directed solely at the reason’s 
ambitions. The theme of the irrational, as it is conceived by the 
existentials, is reason becoming confused and escaping by negating 
itself. The absurd is lucid reason noting its limits. 

Only at the end of this difficult path does the absurd man 
recognize his true motives. Upon comparing his inner exigence and 
what is then offered him, he suddenly feels he is going to turn 
away. In the universe of Husserl the world becomes clear and that 
longing for familiarity that man’s heart harbors becomes useless. 
In Kierkegaard’s apocalypse that desire for clarity must be given 
up if it wants to be satisfied. Sin is not so much knowing (if it 
were, everybody would be innocent) as wanting to know. Indeed, it 
is the only sin of which the absurd man can feel that it constitutes 
both his guilt and his innocence. He is offered a solution in which 
all the past contradictions have become merely polemical games. 
But this is not the way he experienced them. Their truth must be 
preserved, which consists in not being satisfied. He does not want 
preaching. 

My reasoning wants to be faithful to the evidence that aroused 
it. That evidence is the absurd. It is that divorce between the mind 
that desires and the world that disappoints, my nostalgia for unity, 
this fragmented universe and the contradiction that binds them 
together. Kierkegaard suppresses my nostalgia and Husserl gathers 
together that universe. That is not what I was expecting. It was a 
matter of living and thinking with those dislocations, of knowing 
whether one had to accept or refuse. There can be no question of 
masking the evidence, of suppressing the absurd by denying one of 
the terms of its equation. It is essential to know whether one can 
live with it or whether, on the other hand, logic commands one to 
die of it. I am not interested in philosophical suicide, but rather in 
plain suicide. I merely wish to purge it of its emotional content and 


know its logic and its integrity. Any other position implies for the 
absurd mind deceit and the mind’s retreat before what the mind 
itself has brought to light. Husserl claims to obey the desire to 
escape “the inveterate habit of living and thinking in certain well- 
known and convenient conditions of existence,” but the final leap 
restores in him the eternal and its comfort. The leap does not 
represent an extreme danger as Kierkegaard would like it to do. 
The danger, on the contrary, lies in the subtle instant that precedes 
the leap. Being able to remain on that dizzying crest—that is 
integrity and the rest is subterfuge. I know also that never has 
helplessness inspired such striking harmonies as those of 
Kierkegaard. But if helplessness has its place in the indifferent 
landscapes of history, it has none in a reasoning whose exigence is 
now known. 

Absurd Freedom 

Now the main thing is done, I hold certain facts from which I 
cannot separate. What I know, what is certain, what I cannot deny, 
what I cannot reject—this is what counts. I can negate everything 
of that part of me that lives on vague nostalgias, except this desire 
for unity, this longing to solve, this need for clarity and cohesion. I 
can refute everything in this world surrounding me that offends or 
enraptures me, except this chaos, this sovereign chance and this 
divine equivalence which springs from anarchy. I don’t know 
whether this world has a meaning that transcends it. But I know 
that I do not know that meaning and that it is impossible for me 
just now to know it. What can a meaning outside my condition 
mean to me? I can understand only in human terms. What I touch, 
what resists me—that is what I understand. And these two 
certainties—my appetite for the absolute and for unity and the 
impossibility of reducing this world to a rational and reasonable 
principle—I also know that I cannot reconcile them. What other 
truth can I admit without lying, without bringing in a hope I lack 
and which means nothing within the limits of my condition? 

If I were a tree among trees, a cat among animals, this life 
would have a meaning, or rather this problem would not arise, for I 
should belong to this world. I should be this world to which I am 
now opposed by my whole consciousness and my whole insistence 
upon familiarity. This ridiculous reason is what sets me in 
opposition to all creation. I cannot cross it out with a stroke of the 
pen. What I believe to be true I must therefore preserve. What 



seems to me so obvious, even against me, I must support. And 
what constitutes the basis of that conflict, of that break between the 
world and my mind, but the awareness of it? If therefore I want to 
preserve it, I can through a constant awareness, ever revived, ever 
alert. This is what, for the moment, I must remember. At this 
moment the absurd, so obvious and yet so hard to win, returns to a 
man’s life and finds its home there. At this moment, too, the mind 
can leave the arid, dried-up path of lucid effort. That path now 
emerges in daily life. It encounters the world of the anonymous 
impersonal pronoun “one,” but henceforth man enters in with his 
revolt and his lucidity. He has forgotten how to hope. This hell of 
the present is his Kingdom at last. All problems recover their sharp 
edge. Abstract evidence retreats before the poetry of forms and 
colors. Spiritual conflicts become embodied and return to the 
abject and magnificent shelter of man’s heart. None of them is 
settled. But all are transfigured. Is one going to die, escape by the 
leap, rebuild a mansion of ideas and forms to one’s own scale? Is 
one, on the contrary, going to take up the heart-rending and 
marvelous wager of the absurd? Let’s make a final effort in this 
regard and draw all our conclusions. The body, affection, creation, 
action, human nobility will then resume their places in this mad 
world. At last man will again find there the wine of the absurd and 
the bread of indifference on which he feeds his greatness. 

Let us insist again on the method: it is a matter of persisting. At 
a certain point on his path the absurd man is tempted. History is 
not lacking in either religions or prophets, even without gods. He is 
asked to leap. All he can reply is that he doesn’t fully understand, 
that it is not obvious. Indeed, he does not want to do anything but 
what he fully understands. He is assured that this is the sin of 
pride, but he does not understand the notion of sin; that perhaps 
hell is in store, but he has not enough imagination to visualize that 
strange future; that he is losing immortal life, but that seems to him 
an idle consideration. An attempt is made to get him to admit his 
guilt. He feels innocent. To tell the truth, that is all he feels—his 
irreparable innocence. This is what allows him everything. Hence, 
what he demands of himself is to live solely with what he knows, 
to accommodate himself to what is, and to bring in nothing that is 
not certain. He is told that nothing is. But this at least is a certainty. 
And it is with this that he is concerned: he wants to find out if it is 
possible to live without appeal. 



Now I can broach the notion of suicide. It has already been felt 
what solution might be given. At this point the problem is 
reversed. It was previously a question of finding out whether or not 
life had to have a meaning to be lived. It now becomes clear, on 
the contrary, that it will be lived all the better if it has no meaning. 
Living an experience, a particular fate, is accepting it fully. Now, 
no one will live this fate, knowing it to be absurd, unless he does 
everything to keep before him that absurd brought to light by 
consciousness. Negating one of the terms of the opposition on 
which he lives amounts to escaping it. To abolish conscious revolt 
is to elude the problem. The theme of permanent revolution is thus 
carried into individual experience. Living is keeping the absurd 
alive. Keeping it alive is, above all, contemplating it. Unlike 
Eurydice, the absurd dies only when we turn away from it. One of 
the only coherent philosophical positions is thus revolt. It is a 
constant confrontation between man and his own obscurity. It is an 
insistence upon an impossible transparency. It challenges the world 
anew every second. Just as danger provided man the unique 
opportunity of seizing awareness, so metaphysical revolt extends 
awareness to the whole of experience. It is that constant presence 
of man in his own eyes. It is not aspiration, for it is devoid of hope. 
That revolt is the certainly of a crushing fate, without the 
resignation that ought to accompany it. 

This is where it is seen to what a degree absurd experience is 
remote from suicide. It may be thought that suicide follows 
revolt—but wrongly. For it does not represent the logical outcome 
of revolt. It is just the contrary by the consent it presupposes. 
Suicide, like the leap, is acceptance at its extreme. Everything is 
over and man returns to his essential history. His future, his unique 
and dreadful future—he sees and rushes toward it. In its way, 
suicide settles the absurd. It engulfs the absurd in the same death. 
But I know that in order to keep alive, the absurd cannot be settled. 
It escapes suicide to the extent that it is simultaneously awareness 
and rejection of death. It is, at the extreme limit of the condemned 
man’s last thought, that shoelace that despite everything he sees a 
few yards away, on the very brink of his dizzying fall. The 
contrary of suicide, in fact, is the man condemned to death. 

That revolt gives life its value. Spread out over the whole 
length of a life, it restores its majesty to that life. To a man devoid 
of blinders, there is no finer sight than that of the intelligence at 
grips with a reality that transcends it. The sight of human pride is 



unequaled. No disparagement is of any use. That discipline that the 
mind imposes on itself, that will conjured up out of nothing, that 
face-to-face struggle have something exceptional about them. To 
impoverish that reality whose inhumanity constitutes man’s 
majesty is tantamount to impoverishing him himself. I understand 
then why the doctrines that explain everything to me also debilitate 
me at the same time. They relieve me of the weight of my own life, 
and yet I must carry it alone. At this juncture, I cannot conceive 
that a skeptical metaphysics can be joined to an ethics of 
renunciation. 

Consciousness and revolt, these rejections are the contrary of 
renunciation. Everything that is indomitable and passionate in a 
human heart quickens them, on the contrary, with its own life. It is 
essential to die unrecon-ciled and not of one’s own free will. 
Suicide is a repudi—ation. The absurd man can only drain 
everything to the bitter end, and deplete himself. The absurd is his 
extreme tension, which he maintains constantly by solitary effort, 
for he knows that in that consciousness and in that day-to-day 
revolt he gives proof of his only truth, which is defiance. This is a 
first consequence. 

If I remain in that prearranged position which consists in 
drawing all the conclusions (and nothing else) involved in a newly 
discovered notion, I am faced with a second paradox. In order to 
remain faithful to that method, I have nothing to do with the 
problem of metaphysical liberty. Knowing whether or not man is 
free doesn’t interest me. I can experience only my own freedom. 
As to it, I can have no general notions, but merely a few clear 
insights. The problem of “freedom as such” has no meaning, for it 
is linked in quite a different way with the problem of God. 
Knowing whether or not man is free involves knowing whether he 
can have a master. The absurdity peculiar to this problem comes 
from the fact that the very notion that makes the problem of 
freedom possible also takes away all its meaning. For in the 
presence of God there is less a problem of freedom than a problem 
of evil. You know the alternative: either we are not free and God 
the all-powerful is responsible for evil. Or we are free and 
responsible but God is not all powerful. All the scholastic 
subtleties have neither added anything to nor subtracted anything 
from the acuteness of this paradox. 



This is why I cannot act lost in the glorification or the mere 
definition of a notion which eludes me and loses its meaning as 
soon as it goes beyond the frame of reference of my individual 
experience. I cannot understand what kind of freedom would be 
given me by a higher being. I have lost the sense of hierarchy. The 
only conception of freedom I can have is that of the prisoner or the 
individual in the midst of the State. The only one I know is 
freedom of thought and action. Now if the absurd cancels all my 
chances of eternal freedom, it restores and magnifies, on the other 
hand, my freedom of action. That privation of hope and future 
means an increase in man’s availability. 

Before encountering the absurd, the everyday man lives with 
aims, a concern for the future or for justification (with regard to 
whom or what is not the question). He weighs his chances, he 
counts on “someday,” his retirement or the labor of his sons. He 
still thinks that something in his life can be directed. In truth, he 
acts as if he were free, even if all the facts make a point of 
contradicting that liberty. But after the absurd, everything is upset. 
That idea that “I am,” my way of acting as if everything has a 
meaning (even if, on occasion, I said that nothing has)—all that is 
given the he in vertiginous fashion by the absurdity of a possible 
death. Thinking of the future, establishing aims for oneself, having 
preferences—all this presupposes a belief in freedom, even if one 
occasionally ascertains that one doesn’t feel it. But at that moment 
I am well aware that that higher liberty, that freedom to be, which 
alone can serve as basis for a truth, does not exist. Death is there as 
the only reality. After death the chips are down. I am not even free, 
either, to perpetuate myself, but a slave, and, above all, a slave 
without hope of an eternal revolution, without recourse to 
contempt. And who without revolution and without contempt can 
remain a slave? What freedom can exist in the fullest sense without 
assurance of eternity? 

But at the same time the absurd man realizes that hitherto he 
was bound to that postulate of freedom on the illusion of which he 
was living. In a certain sense, that hampered him. To the extent to 
which he imagined a purpose to his life, he adapted himself to the 
demands of a purpose to be achieved and became the slave of his 
liberty. Thus I could not act otherwise than as the father (or the 
engineer or the leader of a nation, or the post-office sub-clerk) that 
I am preparing to be. I think I can choose to be that rather than 
something else. I think so unconsciously, to be sure. But at the 



same time I strengthen my postulate with the beliefs of those 
around me, with the presumptions of my human environment 
(others are so sure of being free, and that cheerful mood is so 
contagious!). However far one may remain from any presumption, 
moral or social, one is partly influenced by them and even, for the 
best among them (there are good and bad presumptions), one 
adapts one’s life to them. Thus the absurd man realizes that he was 
not really free. To speak clearly, to the extent to which I hope, to 
which I worry about a truth that might be individual to me, about a 
way of being or creating, to the extent to which I arrange my life 
and prove thereby that I accept its having a meaning, I create for 
myself barriers between which I confine my life. I do like so many 
bureaucrats of the mind and heart who only fill me with disgust 
and whose only vice, I now see clearly, is to take man’s freedom 
seriously. 

The absurd enlightens me on this point: there is no future. 
Henceforth this is the reason for my inner freedom. I shall use two 
comparisons here. Mystics, to begin with, find freedom in giving 
themselves. By losing themselves in their god, by accepting his 
rules, they become secretly free. In spontaneously accepted slavery 
they recover a deeper independence. But what does that freedom 
mean? It may be said, above all, that they feel free with regard to 
themselves, and not so much free as liberated. Likewise, 
completely turned toward death (taken here as the most obvious 
absurdity), the absurd man feels released from everything outside 
that passionate attention crystallizing in him. He enjoys a freedom 
with regard to common rules. It can be seen at this point that the 
initial themes of existential philosophy keep their entire value. The 
return to consciousness, the escape from everyday sleep represent 
the first steps of absurd freedom. But it is existential preaching that 
is alluded to, and with it that spiritual leap which basically escapes 
consciousness. In the same way (this is my second comparison) the 
slaves of antiquity did not belong to themselves. But they knew 
that freedom which consists in not feeling responsible.^ Death, 
too, has patrician hands which, while crushing, also liberate. 

Losing oneself in that bottomless certainty, feeling henceforth 
sufficiently remote from one’s own life to increase it and take a 
broad view of it—this involves the principle of a liberation. Such 
new independence has a definite time limit, like any freedom of 
action. It does not write a check on eternity. But it takes the place 
of the illusions of freedom, which all stopped with death. The 


divine availability of the condemned man before whom the prison 
doors open in a certain early dawn, that unbelievable 
disinterestedness with regard to everything except for the pure 
flame of life—it is clear that death and the absurd are here the 
principles of the only reasonable freedom: that which a human 
heart can experience and live. This is a second consequence. The 
absurd man thus catches sight of a burning and frigid, transparent 
and limited universe in which nothing is possible but everything is 
given, and beyond which all is collapse and nothingness. He can 
then decide to accept such a universe and draw from it his strength, 
his refusal to hope, and the unyielding evidence of a life without 
consolation. 

But what does life mean in such a universe? Nothing else for 
the moment but indifference to the future and a desire to use up 
everything that is given. Belief in the meaning of life always 
implies a scale of values, a choice, our preferences. Belief in the 
absurd, according to our definitions, teaches the contrary. But this 
is worth examining. 

Knowing whether or not one can live without appeal is all that 
interests me. I do not want to get out of my depth. This aspect of 
life being given me, can I adapt myself to it? Now, faced with this 
particular concern, belief in the absurd is tantamount to 
substituting the quantity of experiences for the quality. If I 
convince myself that this life has no other aspect than that of the 
absurd, if I feel that its whole equilibrium depends on that 
perpetual opposition between my conscious revolt and the darkness 
in which it struggles, if I admit that my freedom has no meaning 
except in relation to its limited fate, then I must say that what 
counts is not the best living but the most living. It is not up to me 
to wonder if this is vulgar or revolting, elegant or deplorable. Once 
and for all, value judgments are discarded here in favor of factual 
judgments. I have merely to draw the conclusions from what I can 
see and to risk nothing that is hypothetical. Supposing that living in 
this way were not honorable, then true propriety would command 
me to be dishonorable. 

The most living; in the broadest sense, that rule means nothing. 
It calls for definition. It seems to begin with the fact that the notion 
of quantity has not been sufficiently explored. For it can account 
for a large share of human experience. A man’s rule of conduct 



and his scale of values have no meaning except through the 
quantity and variety of experiences he has been in a position to 
accumulate. Now, the conditions of modern life impose on the 
majority of men the same quantity of experiences and 
consequently the same profound experience. To be sure, there must 
also be taken into consideration the individual’s spontaneous 
contribution, the “given” element in him. But I cannot judge of 
that, and let me repeat that my rule here is to get along with the 
immediate evidence. I see, then, that the individual character of a 
common code of ethics lies not so much in the ideal importance of 
its basic principles as in the norm of an experience that it is 
possible to measure. To stretch a point somewhat, the Greeks had 
the code of their leisure just as we have the code of our eight-hour 
day. But already many men among the most tragic cause us to 
foresee that a longer experience changes this table of values. They 
make us imagine that adventurer of the everyday who through 
mere quantity of experiences would break all records (I am 
purposely using this sports expression) and would thus win his 
own code of ethics.^ Yet let’s avoid romanticism and just ask 
ourselves what such an attitude may mean to a man with his mind 
made up to take up his bet and to observe strictly what he takes to 
be the rules of the game. 

Breaking all the records is first and foremost being faced with 
the world as often as possible. How can that be done without 
contradictions and without playing on words? For on the one hand 
the absurd teaches that all experiences are unimportant, and on the 
other it urges toward the greatest quantity of experiences. How, 
then, can one fail to do as so many of those men I was speaking of 
earlier—choose the form of life that brings us the most possible of 
that human matter, thereby introducing a scale of values that on the 
other hand one claims to reject? 

But again it is the absurd and its contradictory life that teaches 
us. For the mistake is thinking that that quantity of experiences 
depends on the circumstances of our life when it depends solely on 
us. Here we have to be over-simple. To two men living the same 
number of years, the world always provides the same sum of 
experiences. It is up to us to be conscious of them. Being aware of 
one’s life, one’s revolt, one’s freedom, and to the maximum, is 
living, and to the maximum. Where lucidity dominates, the scale of 
values becomes useless. Let’s be even more simple. Let us say that 
the sole obstacle, the sole deficiency to be made good, is 


constituted by premature death. Thus it is that no depth, no 
emotion, no passion, and no sacrifice could render equal in the 
eyes of the absurd man (even if he wished it so) a conscious life of 
forty years and a lucidity spread over sixty years.^ Madness and 
death are his irreparables. Man does not choose. The absurd and 
the extra life it involves therefore do not defend on man’s will, but 
on its contrary, which is death.^ Weighing words carefully, it is 
altogether a question of luck. One just has to be able to consent to 
this. There will never be any substitute for twenty years of life and 
experience. 

By what is an odd inconsistency in such an alert race, the 
Greeks claimed that those who died young were beloved of the 
gods. And that is true only if you are willing to believe that 
entering the ridiculous world of the gods is forever losing the 
purest of joys, which is feeling, and feeling on this earth. The 
present and the succession of presents before a constantly 
conscious soul is the ideal of the absurd man. But the word “ideal” 
rings false in this connection. It is not even his vocation, but 
merely the third consequence of his reasoning. Having started from 
an anguished awareness of the inhuman, the meditation on the 
absurd returns at the end of its itinerary to the very heart of the 
passionate flames of human revolt.^ 

* * * 

Thus I draw from the absurd three consequences, which are my 
revolt, my freedom, and my passion. By the mere activity of 
consciousness I transform into a rule of life what was an invitation 
to death—and I refuse suicide. I know, to be sure, the dull 
resonance that vibrates throughout these days. Yet I have but a 
word to say: that it is necessary. When Nietzsche writes: “It clearly 
seems that the chief thing in heaven and on earth is to obey at 
length and in a single direction: in the long run there results 
something for which it is worth the trouble of living on this earth 
as, for example, virtue, art, music, the dance, reason, the mind— 
something that transfigures, something delicate, mad, or divine,” 
he elucidates the rule of a really distinguished code of ethics. But 
he also points the way of the absurd man. Obeying the flame is 
both the easiest and the hardest thing to do. However, it is good for 
man to judge himself occasionally. He is alone in being able to do 
so. 

“Prayer,” says Alain, “is when night descends over thought.” 


“But the mind must meet the night,” reply the mystics and the 
existentials. Yes, indeed, but not that night that is bom under 
closed eyelids and through the mere will of man—dark, 
impenetrable night that the mind calls up in order to plunge into it. 
If it must encounter a night, let it be rather that of despair, which 
remains lucid—polar night, vigil of the mind, whence will arise 
perhaps that white and virginal brightness which outlines every 
object in the light of the intelligence. At that degree, equivalence 
encounters passionate understanding. Then it is no longer even a 
question of judging the existential leap. It resumes its place amid 
the age-old fresco of human attitudes. For the spectator, if he is 
conscious, that leap is still absurd. In so far as it thinks it solves the 
paradox, it reinstates it intact. On this score, it is stirring. On this 
score, everything resumes its place and the absurd world is reborn 
in all its splendor and diversity. 

But it is bad to stop, hard to be satisfied with a single way of 
seeing, to go without contradiction, perhaps the most subtle of all 
spiritual forces. The preceding merely defines a way of thinking. 
But the point is to live. 

The Absurd Man 

If Stavrogin believes, he does not think he believes. If he does 
not believe, he does not think he does not believe. 

—The Possessed 

My field,” said Goethe, “is time.” That is indeed the absurd 
speech. What, in fact, is the absurd man? He who, without 
negating it, does nothing for the eternal. Not that nostalgia is 
foreign to him. But he prefers his courage and his reasoning. The 
first teaches him to live without appeal and to get along with what 
he has; the second informs him of his limits. Assured of his 
temporally limited freedom, of his revolt devoid of future, and of 
his mortal consciousness, he lives out his adventure within the 
span of his lifetime. That is his field, that is his action, which he 
shields from any judgment but his own. A greater life cannot mean 
for him another life. That would be unfair. I am not even speaking 
here of that paltry eternity that is called posterity. Mine Roland 
relied on herself. That rashness was taught a lesson. Posterity is 
glad to quote her remark, but forgets to judge it. Mine Roland is 
indifferent to posterity. 



There can be no question of holding forth on ethics. I have seen 
people behave badly with great morality and I note every day that 
integrity has no need of rules. There is but one moral code that the 
absurd man can accept, the one that is not separated from God: the 
one that is dictated. But it so happens that he lives outside that 
God. As for the others (I mean also immoralism), the absurd man 
sees nothing in them but justifications and he has nothing to 
justify. I start out here from the principle of his innocence. 

That innocence is to be feared. “Everything is permitted,” 
exclaims Ivan Karamazov. That, too, smacks of the absurd. But on 
condition that it not be taken in the vulgar sense. I don’t know 
whether or not it has been sufficiently pointed out that it is not an 
outburst of relief or of joy, but rather a bitter acknowledgment of a 
fact. The certainty of a God giving a meaning to life far surpasses 
in attractiveness the ability to behave badly with impunity. The 
choice would not be hard to make. But there is no choice, and that 
is where the bitterness comes in. The absurd does not liberate; it 
binds. It does not authorize all actions. “Everything is permitted” 
does not mean that nothing is forbidden. The absurd merely 
confers an equivalence on the consequences of those actions. It 
does not recommend crime, for this would be childish, but it 
restores to remorse its futility. Likewise, if all experiences are 
indifferent, that of duty is as legitimate as any other. One can be 
virtuous through a whim. 

All systems of morality are based on the idea that an action has 
consequences that legitimize or cancel it. A mind imbued with the 
absurd merely judges that those consequences must be considered 
calmly. It is ready to pay up. In other words, there may be 
responsible persons, but there are no guilty ones, in its opinion. At 
very most, such a mind will consent to use past experience as a 
basis for its future actions. Time will prolong time, and life will 
serve life. In this field that is both limited and bulging with 
possibilities, everything in himself, except his lucidity, seems 
unforeseeable to him. What rule, then, could emanate from that 
unreasonable order? The only truth that might seem instructive to 
him is not formal: it comes to life and unfolds in men. The absurd 
mind cannot so much expect ethical rules at the end of its 
reasoning as, rather, illustrations and the breath of human lives. 
The few following images are of this type. They prolong the 
absurd reasoning by giving it a specific attitude and their warmth. 



Do I need to develop the idea that an example is not necessarily 
an example to be followed (even less so, if possible, in the absurd 
world) and that these illustrations are not therefore models? 
Besides the fact that a certain vocation is required for this, one 
becomes ridiculous, with all due allowance, when drawing from 
Rousseau the conclusion that one must walk on all fours and from 
Nietzsche that one must maltreat one’s mother. “It is essential to be 
absurd,” writes a modern author, “it is not essential to be a dupe.” 
The attitudes of which I shall treat can assume their whole 
meaning only through consideration of their contraries. A sub¬ 
clerk in the post office is the equal of a conqueror if consciousness 
is common to them. All experiences are indifferent in this regard. 
There are some that do either a service or a disservice to man. 
They do him a service if he is conscious. Otherwise, that has no 
importance: a man’s failures imply judgment, not of 
circumstances, but of himself. 

I am choosing solely men who aim only to expend themselves 
or whom I see to be expending themselves. That has no further 
implications. For the moment I want to speak only of a world in 
which thoughts, like lives, are devoid of future. Everything that 
makes man work and get excited utilizes hope. The sole thought 
that is not mendacious is therefore a sterile thought. In the absurd 
world the value of a notion or of a life is measured by its sterility. 

Don Juanism 

If it were sufficient to love, things would be too easy. The more 
one loves, the stronger the absurd grows. It is not through lack of 
love that Don Juan goes from woman to woman. It is ridiculous to 
represent him as a mystic in quest of total love. But it is indeed 
because he loves them with the same passion and each time with 
his whole self that he must repeat his gift and his profound quest. 
Whence each woman hopes to give him what no one has ever 
given him. Each time they are utterly wrong and merely manage to 
make him feel the need of that repetition. “At last,” exclaims one 
of them, “I have given you love.” Can we be surprised that Don 
Juan laughs at this? “At last? No,” he says, “but once more.” Why 
should it be essential to love rarely in order to love much? 

Is Don Juan melancholy? This is not likely. I shall barely have 
recourse to the legend. That laugh, the conquering insolence, that 
playfulness and love of the theater are all clear and joyous. Every 
healthy creature tends to multiply himself. So it is with Don Juan. 



But, furthermore, melancholy people have two reasons for being 
so: they don’t know or they hope. Don Juan knows and does not 
hope. He reminds one of those artists who know their limits, never 
go beyond them, and in that precarious interval in which they take 
their spiritual stand enjoy all the wonderful ease of masters. And 
that is indeed genius: the intelligence that knows its frontiers. Up 
to the frontier of physical death Don Juan is ignorant of 
melancholy. The moment he knows, his laugh bursts forth and 
makes one forgive everything. He was melancholy at the time 
when he hoped. Today, on the mouth of that woman he recognizes 
the bitter and comforting taste of the only knowledge. Bitter? 
Barely: that necessary imperfection that makes happiness 
perceptible! 

It is quite false to try to see in Don Juan a man brought up on 
Ecclesiastes. For nothing is vanity to him except the hope of 
another life. He proves this because he gambles that other life 
against heaven itself. Longing for desire killed by satisfaction, that 
commonplace of the impotent man, does not belong to him. That is 
all right for Faust, who believed in God enough to sell himself to 
the devil. For Don Juan the thing is simpler. Molina’s Burlador 
ever replies to the threats of hell: “What a long respite you give 
me!” What comes after death is futile, and what a long succession 
of days for whoever knows how to be alive! Faust craved worldly 
goods; the poor man had only to stretch out his hand. It already 
amounted to selling his soul when he was unable to gladden it. As 
for satiety, Don Juan insists upon it, on the contrary. If he leaves a 
woman it is not absolutely because he has ceased to desire her. A 
beautiful woman is always desirable. But he desires another, and 
no, this is not the same thing. 

This life gratifies his every wish, and nothing is worse than 
losing it. This madman is a great wise man. But men who live on 
hope do not thrive in this universe where kindness yields to 
generosity, affection to virile silence, and communion to solitary 
courage. And all hasten to say: “He was a weakling, an idealist or a 
saint.” One has to disparage the greatness that insults. 

* * * 

People are sufficiently annoyed (or that smile of complicity 
that debases what it admires) by Don Juan’s speeches and by that 
same remark that he uses on all women. But to anyone who seeks 
quantity in his joys, the only thing that matters is efficacy. What is 



the use of complicating the passwords that have stood the test? No 
one, neither the woman nor the man, listens to them, but rather to 
the voice that pronounces them. They are the rule, the convention, 
and the courtesy. After they are spoken the most important still 
remains to be done. Don Juan is already getting ready for it. Why 
should he give himself a problem in morality? He is not like 
Milosz’s Manara, who damns himself through a desire to be a 
saint. Hell for him is a thing to be provoked. He has but one reply 
to divine wrath, and that is human honor: “I have honor,” he says 
to the Commander, “and I am keeping my promise because I am a 
knight.” But it would be just as great an error to make an 
immoralist of him. In this regard, he is “like everyone else”: he has 
the moral code of his likes and dislikes. Don Juan can be properly 
understood only by constant reference to what he commonly 
symbolizes: the ordinary seducer and the sexual athlete. He is an 
ordinary seducer.^ Except for the difference that he is conscious, 
and that is why he is absurd. A seducer who has become lucid will 
not change for all that. Seducing is his condition in life. Only in 
novels does one change condition or become better. Yet it can be 
said that at the same time nothing is changed and everything is 
transformed. What Don Juan realizes in action is an ethic of 
quantity, whereas the saint, on the contrary, tends toward quality. 
Not to believe in the profound meaning of things belongs to the 
absurd man. As for those cordial or wonder-struck faces, he eyes 
them, stores them up, and does not pause over them. Time keeps 
up with him. The absurd man is he who is not apart from time. Don 
Juan does not think of “collecting” women. He exhausts their 
number and with them his chances of life. “Collecting” amounts to 
being capable of living off one’s past. But he rejects regret, that 
other form of hope. He is incapable of looking at portraits. 

* * * 

Is he selfish for all that? In his way, probably. But here, too, it 
is essential to understand one another. 

There are those who are made for living and those who are 
made for loving. At least Don Juan would be inclined to say so. 
But he would do so in a very few words such as he is capable of 
choosing. For the love we are speaking of here is clothed in 
illusions of the eternal. As all the specialists in passion teach us, 
there is no eternal love but what is thwarted. There is scarcely any 
passion without struggle. Such a love culminates only in the 


ultimate contradiction of death. One must be Werther or nothing. 
There, too, there are several ways of committing suicide, one of 
which is the total gift and forget-fulness of self. Don Juan, as well 
as anyone else, knows that this can be stirring. But he is one of the 
very few who know that this is not the important thing. He knows 
just as well that those who turn away from all personal life through 
a great love enrich themselves perhaps but certainly impoverish 
those their love has chosen. A mother or a passionate wife 
necessarily has a closed heart, for it is turned away from the world. 
A single emotion, a single creature, a single face, but all is 
devoured. Quite a different love disturbs Don Juan, and this one is 
liberating. It brings with it all the faces in the world, and its tremor 
comes from the fact that it knows itself to be mortal. Don Juan has 
chosen to be nothing. 

For him it is a matter of seeing clearly. We call love what binds 
us to certain creatures only by reference to a collective way of 
seeing for which books and legends are responsible. But of love I 
know only that mixture of desire, affection, and intelligence that 
binds me to this or that creature. That compound is not the same 
for another person. I do not have the right to cover all these 
experiences with the same name. This exempts one from 
conducting them with the same gestures. The absurd man 
multiplies here again what he cannot unify. Thus he discovers a 
new way of being which liberates him at least as much as it 
liberates those who approach him. There is no noble love but that 
which recognizes itself to be both short-lived and exceptional. All 
those deaths and all those rebirths gathered together as in a sheaf 
make up for Don Juan the flowering of his life. It is his way of 
giving and of vivifying. I let it be decided whether or not one can 
speak of selfishness. 

* * * 

I think at this point of all those who absolutely insist that Don 
Juan be punished. Not only in another life, but even in this one. I 
think of all those tales, legends, and laughs about the aged Don 
Juan. But Don Juan is already ready. To a conscious man old age 
and what it portends are not a surprise. Indeed, he is conscious 
only in so far as he does not conceal its horror from himself There 
was in Athens a temple dedicated to old age. Children were taken 
there. As for Don Juan, the more people laugh at him, the more his 
figure stands out. Thereby he rejects the one the romantics lent 



him. No one wants to laugh at that tormented, pitiful Don Juan. He 
is pitied; heaven itself will redeem him? But that’s not it. In the 
universe of which Don Juan has a glimpse, ridicule too is included. 
He would consider it nonnal to be chastised. That is the rule of the 
game. And, indeed, it is typical of his nobility to have accepted all 
the rules of the game. Yet he knows he is right and that there can 
be no question of punishment. A fate is not a punishment. 

That is his crime, and how easy it is to understand why the men 
of God call down punishment on his head. He achieves a 
knowledge without illusions which negates everything they 
profess. Loving and possessing, conquering and consuming—that 
is his way of knowing. (There is significance in that favorite 
Scriptural word that calls the carnal act “knowing.”) He is their 
worst enemy to the extent that he is ignorant of them. A chronicler 
relates that the true Burlador died assassinated by Fransciscans 
who wanted “to put an end to the excesses and blasphemies of Don 
Juan, whose birth assured him impunity.” Then they proclaimed 
that heaven had struck him down. No one has proved that strange 
end. Nor has anyone proved the contrary. But without wondering if 
it is probable, I can say that it is logical. I want merely to single out 
at this point the word “birth” and to play on words: it was the fact 
of living that assured his innocence. It was from death alone that 
he derived a guilt now become legendary. 

What else does that stone Commander signify, that cold statue 
set in motion to punish the blood and courage that dared to think? 
All the powers of eternal Reason, of order, of universal morality, 
all the foreign grandeur of a God open to wrath are summed up in 
him. That gigantic and soulless stone merely symbolizes the forces 
that Don Juan negated forever. But the Commander’s mission 
stops there. The thunder and lightning can return to the imitation 
heaven whence they were called forth. The real tragedy takes place 
quite apart from them. No, it was not under a stone hand that Don 
Juan met his death. I am inclined to believe in the legendary 
bravado, in that mad laughter of the healthy man provoking a non¬ 
existent God. But, above all, I believe that on that evening when 
Don Juan was waiting at Anna’s the Commander didn’t come, and 
that after midnight the blasphemer must have felt the dreadful 
bitterness of those who have been right. I accept even more readily 
the account of his life that has him eventually burying himself in a 
monastery. Not that the edifying aspect of the story can he 
considered probable. What refuge can he go ask of God? But this 



symbolizes rather the logical outcome of a life completely imbued 
with the absurd, the grim ending of an existence turned toward 
short lived joys. At this point sensual pleasure winds up in 
asceticism. It is essential to realize that they may be, as it were, the 
two aspects of the same destitution. What more ghastly image can 
be called up than that of a man betrayed by his body who, simply 
because he did not die in time, lives out the comedy while awaiting 
the end, face to face with that God he does not adore, serving him 
as he served life, kneeling before a void and arms outstretched 
toward a heaven without eloquence that he knows to he also 
without depth? 

I see Don Juan in a cell of one of those Spanish monasteries 
lost on a hilltop. And if he contemplates anything at all, it is not the 
ghosts of past loves, but perhaps, through a narrow slit in the sun¬ 
baked wall, some silent Spanish plain, a noble, soulless land in 
which he recognizes himself. Yes, it is on this melancholy and 
radiant image that the curtain must be rung down. The ultimate 
end, awaited but never desired, the ultimate end is negligible. 

Drama 

“The play’s the thing,” says Hamlet, “wherein I’ll catch the 
conscience of the king.” 

“Catch” is indeed the word. For conscience moves swiftly or 
withdraws within itself. It has to be caught on the wing, at that 
barely perceptible moment when it glances fleetingly at itself. The 
everyday man does not enjoy tarrying. Everything, on the contrary, 
hurries him onward. But at the same time nothing interests him 
more than himself, especially his potentialities. Whence his interest 
in the theater, in the show, where so many fates are offered him, 
where he can accept the poetry without feeling the sorrow. There at 
least can be recognized the thoughtless man, and he continues to 
hasten toward some hope or other. The absurd man begins where 
that one leaves off, where, ceasing to admire the play, the mind 
wants to enter in. Entering into all these lives, experiencing them 
in their diversity, amounts to acting them out. I am not saying that 
actors in general obey that impulse, that they are absurd men, but 
that their fate is an absurd fate which might charm and attract a 
lucid heart. It is necessary to establish this in order to grasp 
without misunderstanding what will follow. 

The actor’s realm is that of the fleeting. Of all kinds of fame, it 
is known, his is the most ephemeral. At least, this is said in 



conversation. But all kinds of fame are ephemeral. From the point 
of view of Sirius, Goethe’s works in ten thousand years will be 
dust and his name forgotten. Perhaps a handful of archaeologists 
will look for “evidence” as to our era. That idea has always 
contained a lesson. Seriously meditated upon, it reduces our 
perturbations to the profound nobility that is found in indifference. 
Above all, it directs our concerns toward what is most certain— 
that is, toward the immediate. Of all kinds of fame the least 
deceptive is the one that is lived. 

Hence the actor has chosen multiple fame, the fame that is 
hallowed and tested. From the fact that everything is to die 
someday he draws the best conclusion. An actor succeeds or does 
not succeed. A writer has some hope even if he is not appreciated. 
He assumes that his works will bear witness to what he was. At 
best the actor will leave us a photograph, and nothing of what he 
was himself, his gestures and his silences, his gasping or his 
panting with love, will come down to us. For him, not to be known 
is not to act, and not acting is dying a hundred times with all the 
creatures he would have brought to life or resuscitated. 

Why should we be surprised to find a fleeting fame built upon 
the most ephemeral of creations? The actor has three hours to be 
Iago or Alceste, Phedre or Gloucester. In that short space of time 
he makes them come to life and die on fifty square yards of boards. 
Never has the absurd been so well illustrated or at such length. 
What more revelatory epitome can be imagined than those 
marvelous lives, those exceptional and total desti— 

nies unfolding for a few hours within a stage set? Off the stage, 
Sigismundo ceases to count. Two hours later he is seen dining out. 
Then it is, perhaps, that life is a dream. But after Sigismundo 
comes another. The hero suffering from uncertainty takes the place 
of the man roaring for his revenge. By thus sweeping over 
centuries and minds, by miming man as he can be and as he is, the 
actor has much in common with that other absurd individual, the 
traveler. Like him, he drains something and is constantly on the 
move. He is a traveler in time and, for the best, the hunted traveler, 
pursued by souls. If ever the ethics of quantity could find 
sustenance, it is indeed on that strange stage. To what degree the 
actor benefits from the characters is hard to say. But that is not the 
important thing. It is merely a matter of knowing how far he 



identifies hitnself with those irreplaceable lives. It often happens 
that he carries them with him, that they somewhat overflow the 
time and place in which they were born. They accompany the 
actor, who cannot very readily separate himself from what he has 
been. Occasionally when reaching for his glass he resumes 
Hamlet’s gesture of raising his cup. No, the distance separating 
him from the creatures into whom he infuses life is not so great. He 
abundantly illustrates every month or every day that so suggestive 
truth that there is no frontier between what a man wants to be and 
what he is. Always concerned with better representing, he 
demonstrates to what a degree appearing creates being. For that is 
his art—to simulate absolutely, to project himself as deeply as 
possible into lives that are not his own. At the end of his effort his 
vocation becomes clear: to apply himself wholeheartedly to being 
nothing or to being several. The narrower the limits allotted him 
for creating his character, the more necessary his talent. He will die 
in three hours under the mask he has assumed today. Within three 
hours he must experience and express a whole exceptional life. 
That is called losing oneself to find oneself. In those three hours he 
travels the whole course of the dead-end path that the man in the 
audience takes a lifetime to cover. 

A mime of the ephemeral, the actor trains and perfects himself 
only in appearances. The theatrical convention is that the heart 
expresses itself and communicates itself only through gestures and 
in the body—or through the voice, which is as much of the soul as 
of the body. The rule of that art insists that everything be 
magnified and translated into flesh. If it were essential on the stage 
to love as people really love, to employ that irreplaceable voice of 
the heart, to look as people contemplate in life, our speech would 
be in code. But here silences must make themselves heard. Love 
speaks up louder, and immobility itself becomes spectacular. The 
body is king, Not everyone can be “theatrical,” and this unjustly 
maligned word covers a whole aesthetic and a whole ethic. Half a 
man’s life is spent in implying, in turning away, and in keeping 
silent. Here the actor is the intruder. He breaks the spell chaining 
that soul, and at last the passions can rush onto their stage. They 
speak in every gesture; they live only through shouts and cries. 
Thus the actor creates his characters for display. He outlines or 
sculptures them and slips into their imaginary form, transfusing his 
blood into their phantoms. I am of course speaking of great drama, 



the kind that gives the actor an opportunity to fulfill his wholly 
physical fate. Take Shakespeare, for instance. In that impulsive 
drama the physical passions lead the dance. They explain 
everything. Without them all would collapse. Never would King 
Lear keep the appointment set by madness without the brutal 
gesture that exiles Cordelia and condemns Edgar. It is just that the 
unfolding of that tragedy should thenceforth be dominated by 
madness. Souls are given over to the demons and their saraband. 
No fewer than four madmen: one by trade, another by intention, 
and the last two through suffering—four disordered bodies, four 
unutterable aspects of a single condition. 

The very scale of the human body is inadequate. The mask and 
the buskin, the make-up that reduces and accentuates the face in its 
essential elements, the costume that exaggerates and simplifies— 
that universe sacrifices everything to appearance and is made 
solely for the eye. Through an absurd miracle, it is the body that 
also brings knowledge. I should never really understand Iago 
unless I played his part. It is not enough to hear him, for I grasp 
him only at the moment when I see him. Of the absurd character 
the actor consequently has the monotony, that single, oppressive 
silhouette, simultaneously strange and familiar, that he carries 
about from hero to hero. There, too, the great dramatic work 
contributes to this unity of tone.^ This is where the actor 
contradicts himself: the same and yet so various, so many souls 
summed up in a single body. Yet it is the absurd contradiction 
itself, that individual who wants to achieve everything and live 
everything, that useless attempt, that ineffectual persistence. What 
always contradicts itself nevertheless joins in him. He is at that 
point where body and mind converge, where the mind, tired of its 
defeats, turns toward its most faithful ally. “And blest are those,” 
says Hamlet, “whose blood and judgment are so well commingled 
that they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger to sound what stop she 
please.” 

How could the Church have failed to condemn such a practice 
on the part of the actor? She repudiated in that art the heretical 
multiplication of souls, the emotional debauch, the scandalous 
presumption of a mind that objects to living but one life and hurls 
itself into all forms of excess. She proscribed in them that 
preference for the present and that triumph of Proteus which are 
the negation of everything she teaches. Eternity is not a game. A 
mind foolish enough to prefer a comedy to eternity has lost its 


salvation. Between “everywhere” and “forever” there is no 
compromise. Whence that much maligned profession can give rise 
to a tremendous spiritual conflict. “What matters,” said Nietzsche, 
“is not eternal life but eternal vivacity.” All drama is, in fact, in 
this choice. Celimene against Elianthe, the whole subject in the 
absurd consequence of a nature carried to its extreme, and the 
verse itself, the “bad verse,” barely accented l ik e the monotony of 
the character’s nature. 

Adrienne Lecouvreur on her deathbed was willing to confess 
and receive communion, but refused to abjure her profession. She 
thereby lost the benefit of the confession. Did this not amount, in 
effect, to choosing her absorbing passion in preference to God? 
And that woman in the death throes refusing in tears to repudiate 
what she called her art gave evidence of a greatness that she never 
achieved behind the footlights. This was her finest role and the 
hardest one to play. Choosing between heaven and a ridiculous 
fidelity, preferring oneself to eternity or losing oneself in God is 
the age-old tragedy in which each must play his part. 

The actors of the era knew they were excommunicated. 
Entering the profession amounted to choosing Hell. And the 
Church discerned in them her worst enemies. A few men of letters 
protest: “What! Refuse the last rites to Moliere!” But that was just, 
and especially in one who died onstage and finished under the 
actor’s make-up a life entirely devoted to dispersion. In his case 
genius is invoked, which excuses everything. But genius excuses 
nothing, just because it refuses to do so. 

The actor knew at that time what punishment was in store for 
him. But what significance could such vague threats have 
compared to the final punishment that life itself was reserving for 
him? This was the one that he felt in advance and accepted wholly. 
To the actor as to the absurd man, a premature death is irreparable. 
Nothing can make up for the sum of faces and centuries he would 
otherwise have traversed. But in any case, one has to die. For the 
actor is doubtless everywhere, but time sweeps him along, too, and 
makes its impression with him. 

It requires but a little imagination to feel what an actor’s fate 
means. It is in time that he makes up and enumerates his 
characters. It is in time likewise that he learns to dominate them. 
The greater number of different lives he has lived, the more aloof 
he can be from them. The time comes when he must die to the 
stage and for the world. What he has lived faces him. He sees 



clearly. He feels the harrowing and irreplaceable quality of that 
adventure. He knows and can now die. There are homes for aged 
actors. 

Conquest 

“No,” says the conqueror, “don’t assume that because I love 
action I have had to forget how to think. On the contrary I can 
throughly define what I believe. For I believe it firmly and I see it 
surely and clearly. Beware of those who say: ‘I know this too well 
to be able to express it.’ For if they cannot do so, this is because 
they don’t know it or because out of laziness they stopped at the 
outer crust. 

“I have not many opinions. At the end of a life man notices that 
he has spent years becoming sure of a single truth. But a single 
truth, if it is obvious, is enough to guide an existence. As for me, I 
decidedly have something to say about the individual. One must 
speak of him bluntly and, if need be, with the appropriate 
contempt. 

“A man is more a man through the things he keeps to himself 
than through those he says. There are many that I shall keep to 
myself. But I firmly believe that all those who have judged the 
individual have done so with much less experience than we on 
which to base their judgment. The intelligence, the stirring 
intelligence perhaps foresaw what it was essential to note. But the 
era, its ruins, and its blood overwhelm us with facts. It was 
possible for ancient nations, and even for more recent ones down 
to our machine age, to weigh one against the other the virtues of 
society and of the individual, to try to find out which was to serve 
the other. To begin with, that was possible by virtue of that 
stubborn aberration in man’s heart according to which human 
beings were created to serve or be served. In the second place, it 
was possible because neither society nor the individual had yet 
revealed all their ability. 

“I have seen bright minds express astonishment at the 
masterpieces of Dutch painters born at the height of the bloody 
wars in Flanders, be amazed by the prayers of Silesian mystics 
brought up during the frightful Thirty Years’ War. Eternal values 
survive secular turmoils before their astonished eyes. But there has 
been progress since. The painters of today are deprived of such 
serenity. Even if they have basically the heart the creator needs—I 
mean the closed heart—it is of no use; for everyone, including the 



saint himself, is mobilized. This is perhaps what I have felt most 
deeply. At every form that miscarries in the trenches, at every 
outline, metaphor, or prayer crushed under steel, the eternal loses a 
round. Conscious that I cannot stand aloof from my time, I have 
decided to be an integral part of it. This is why I esteem the 
individual only because he strikes me as ridiculous and humiliated. 
Knowing that there are no victorious causes, I have a liking for lost 
causes: they require an uncontaminated soul, equal to its defeat as 
to its temporary victories. For anyone who feels bound up with this 
world’s fate, the clash of civilizations has something agonizing 
about it. I have made that anguish mine at the same time that I 
wanted to join in. Between history and the eternal I have chosen 
history because I like certainties. Of it, at least, I am certain, and 
how can I deny this force crushing me? 

“There always comes a time when one must choose between 
contemplation and action. This is called becoming a man. Such 
wrenches are dreadful. But for a proud heart there can be no 
compromise. There is God or time, that cross or this sword. This 
world has a higher meaning that transcends its worries, or nothing 
is true but those worries. One must live with time and die with it, 
or else elude it for a greater life. I know that one can compromise 
and live in the world while believing in the eternal. That is called 
accepting. But I loathe this tenn and want all or nothing. If I 
choose action, don’t think that contemplation is like an unknown 
country to me. But it cannot give me everything, and, deprived of 
the eternal, I want to ally myself with time. I do not want to put 
down to my account either nostalgia or bitterness, and I merely 
want to see clearly. I tell you, tomorrow you will be mobilized. For 
you and for me that is a liberation. The individual can do nothing 
and yet he can do everything. In that wonderful unattached state 
you understand why I exalt and crush him at one and the same 
time. It is the world that pulverizes him and I who liberate him. I 
provide him with all his rights. 

“Conquerors know that action is in itself useless. There is but 
one useful action, that of remaking man and the earth. I shall never 
remake men. But one must do ’as if.’ For the path of struggle leads 
me to the flesh. Even humiliated, the flesh is my only certainty. I 
can live only on it. The creature is my native land. This is why I 
have chosen this absurd and ineffectual effort. This is why I am on 
the side of the struggle. The epoch lends itself to this, as I have 
said. Hitherto the greatness of a conqueror was geographical. It 



was measured by the extent of the conquered territories. There is a 
reason why the word has changed in meaning and has ceased to 
signify the victorious general. The greatness has changed camp. It 
lies in protest and the blind-alley sacrifice. There, too, it is not 
through a preference for defeat. Victory would be desirable. But 
there is but one victory, and it is eternal. That is the one I shall 
never have. That is where I stumble and cling. A revolution is 
always accomplished against the gods, beginning with the 
revolution of Prometheus, the first of modern conquerors. It is 
man’s demands made against his fate; the demands of the poor are 
but a pretext. Yet I can seize that spirit only in its historical act, 
and that is where I make contact with it. Don’t assume, however, 
that I take pleasure in it: opposite the essential contradiction, I 
maintain my human contradiction. I establish my lucidity in the 
midst of what negates it. I exalt man be-fore what crushes him, and 
my freedom, my revolt, and my passion come together then in that 
tension, that lucidity, and that vast repetition. 

“Yes, man is his own end. And he is his only end. If he aims to 
be something, it is in this life. Now I know it only too well. 
Conquerors sometimes talk of vanquishing and overcoming. But it 
is always ‘overcoming oneself that they mean. You are well aware 
of what that means. Every man has felt himself to be the equal of a 
god at certain moments. At least, this is the way it is expressed. 
But this comes from the fact that in a flash he felt the amazing 
grandeur of the human mind. The conquerors are merely those 
among men who are conscious enough of their strength to be sure 
of living constantly on those heights and fully aware of that 
grandeur. It is a question of arithmetic, of more or less. The 
conquerors are capable of the more. But they are capable of no 
more than man himself when he wants. This is why they never 
leave the human crucible, plunging into the seething soul of 
revolutions. 

“There they find the creature mutilated, but they also encounter 
there the only values they like and admire, man and his silence. 
This is both their destitution and their wealth. There is but one 
luxury for them—that of human relations. How can one fail to 
realize that in this vulnerable universe everything that is human 
and solely human assumes a more vivid meaning? Taut faces, 
threatened fraternity, such strong and chaste friendship among 
men—these are the true riches because they are transitory. In their 
midst the mind is most aware of its powers and limitations. That is 



to say, its efficacity. Some have spoken of genius. But genius is 
easy to say; I prefer the intelligence. It must be said that it can be 
magnificent then. It lights up this desert and dominates it. It knows 
its obligations and illustrates them. It will die at the same time as 
this body. But knowing this constitutes its freedom. 

“We are not ignorant of the fact that all churches are against us. 
A heart so keyed up eludes the eternal, and all churches, divine or 
political, lay claim to the eternal. Happiness and courage, 
retribution or justice are secondary ends for them. It is a doctrine 
they bring, and one must subscribe to it. But I have no concern 
with ideas or with the eternal. The truths that come within my 
scope can be touched with the hand. I cannot separate from them. 
This is why you cannot base anything on me: nothing of the 
conqueror lasts, not even his doctrines. 

“At the end of all that, despite everything, is death. We know 
also that it ends everything. This is why those cemeteries all over 
Europe, which obsess some among us, are hideous. People beautify 
only what they love, and death repels us and tires our patience. It, 
too, is to be conquered. The last Carrara, a prisoner in Padua 
emptied by the plague and besieged by the Venetians, ran 
screaming through the halls of his deserted palace: he was calling 
on the devil and asking him for death. This was a way of 
overcoming it. And it is likewise a mark of courage characteristic 
of the Occident to have made so ugly the places where death thinks 
itself honored. In the rebel s universe, death exalts injustice. It is 
the supreme abuse. 

“Others, without compromising either, have chosen the eternal 
and denounced the illusion of this world. Their cemeteries smile 
amid numerous flowers and birds. That suits the conqueror and 
gives him a clear image of what he has rejected. He has chosen, on 
the contrary, the black iron fence or the potter’s field. The best 
among the men of God occasionally are seized with fright mingled 
with consideration and pity for minds that can live with such an 
image of their death. Yet those minds derive their strength and 
justification from this. Our fate stands before us and we provoke 
him. Less out of pride than out of awareness of our ineffectual 
condition. We, too, sometimes feel pity for ourselves. It is the only 
compassion that seems acceptable to us: a feeling that perhaps you 
hardly understand and that seems to you scarcely virile. Yet the 
most daring among us are the ones who feel it. But we call the 



lucid ones virile and we do not want a strength that is apart from 
lucidity.” 


Let me repeat that these images do not propose moral codes 
and involve no judgments: they are sketches. They merely 
represent a style of life. The lover, the actor, or the adventurer 
plays the absurd. But equally well, if he wishes, the chaste man, 
the civil servant, or the president of the Republic. It is enough to 
know and to mask nothing. In Italian museums are sometimes 
found little painted screens that the priest used to hold in front of 
the face of condemned men to hide the scaffold from them. The 
leap in all its forms, rushing into the divine or the eternal, 
surrendering to the illusions of the everyday or of the idea—all 
these screens hide the absurd. But there are civil servants without 
screens, and they are the ones of whom I mean to speak. I have 
chosen the most extreme ones. At this level the absurd gives them 
a royal power. It is true that those princes are without a kingdom. 
But they have this advantage over others: they know that all 
royalties are illusory. They know that is their whole nobility, and it 
is useless to speak in relation to them of hidden misfortune or the 
ashes of disillusion. Being deprived of hope is not despairing. The 
flames of earth are surely worth celestial perfumes. Neither I nor 
anyone can judge them here. They are not striving to be better; 
they are attempting to be consistent. If the term “wise man” can be 
applied to the man who lives on what he has without speculating 
on what he has not, then they are wise men. One of them, a 
conqueror but in the realm of mind, a Don Juan but of knowledge, 
an actor but of the intelligence, kn ows this better than anyone: 
“You nowise deserve a privilege on earth and in heaven for having 
brought to perfection your dear little meek sheep; you nonetheless 
continue to be at best a ridiculous dear little sheep with horns and 
nothing more—even supposing that you do not burst with vanity 
and do not create a scandal by posing as a judge.” 

In any case, it was essential to restore to the absurd reasoning 
more cordial examples. The imagination can add many others, 
inseparable from time and exile, who likewise know how to live in 
harmony with a universe without future and without weakness. 
This absurd, godless world is, then, peopled with men who think 
clearly and have ceased to hope. And I have not yet spoken of the 
most absurd character, who is the creator. 



Absurd Creation 


Philosophy and Fiction 

All those lives maintained in the rarefied air of the absurd 
could not persevere without some profound and constant thought 
to infuse its strength into them. Right here, it can be only a strange 
feeling of fidelity. Conscious men have been seen to fulfill their 
task amid the most stupid of wars without considering themselves 
in contradiction. This is because it was essential to elude nothing. 
There is thus a metaphysical honor in enduring the world’s 
absurdity. Conquest or play-acting, multiple loves, absurd revolt 
are tributes that man pays to his dignity in a campaign in which he 
is defeated in advance. 

It is merely a matter of being faithful to the rule of the battle. 
That thought may suffice to sustain a mind; it has supported and 
still supports whole civilizations. War cannot be negated. One 
must live it or die of it. So it is with the absurd: it is a question of 
breathing with it, of recognizing its lessons and recovering their 
flesh. In this regard the absurd joy par excellence is creation. “Art 
and nothing but art,” said Nietzsche; “we have art in order not to 
die of the truth.” 

In the experience that I am attempting to describe and to stress 
on several modes, it is certain that a new torment arises wherever 
another dies. The childish chasing after forgetfulness, the appeal of 
satisfaction are now devoid of echo. But the constant tension that 
keeps man face to face with the world, the ordered delirium that 
urges him to be receptive to everything leave him another fever. In 
this universe the work of art is then the sole chance of keeping his 
consciousness and of fixing its adventures. Creating is living 
doubly. The groping, anxious quest of a Proust, his meticulous 
collecting of flowers, of wallpapers, and of anxieties, signifies 
nothing else. At the same time, it has no more significance than the 
continual and imperceptible creation in which the actor, the 
conqueror, and all absurd men indulge every day of their lives. All 
try their hands at miming, at repeating, and at recreating the reality 
that is theirs. We always end up by having the appearance of our 
truths. All existence for a man turned away from the eternal is but 
a vast mime under the mask of the absurd. Creation is the great 
mime. 

Such men know to begin with, and then their whole effort is to 
examine, to enlarge, and to enrich the ephemeral island on which 



they have just landed. But first they must know. For the absurd 
discovery coincides with a pause in which future passions are 
prepared and justified. Even men without a gospel have their 
Mount of Olives. And one must not fall asleep on theirs either. For 
the absurd man it is not a matter of explaining and solving, but of 
experiencing and describing. Everything begins with lucid 
indifference. 

Describing—that is the last ambition of an absurd thought. 
Science likewise, having reached the end of its paradoxes, ceases 
to propound and stops to contemplate and sketch the ever virgin 
landscape of phenomena. The heart learns thus that the emotion 
delighting us when we see the world’s aspects comes to us not 
from its depth but from their diversity. Explanation is useless, but 
the sensation remains and, with it, the constant attractions of a 
universe inexhaustible in quantity. The place of the work of art can 
be understood at this point. 

It marks both the death of an experience and its multiplication. 
It is a sort of monotonous and passionate repetition of the themes 
already orchestrated by the world: the body, inexhaustible image 
on the pediment of temples, forms or colors, number or grief. It is 
therefore not indifferent, as a conclusion, to encounter once again 
the principal themes of this essay in the wonderful and childish 
world of the creator. It would be wrong to see a symbol in it and to 
think that the work of art can be considered at last as a refuge for 
the absurd. It is itself an absurd phenomenon, and we are 
concerned merely with its description. It does not offer an escape 
for the intellectual ailment. Rather, it is one of the symptoms of 
that ailment which reflects it throughout a man’s whole thought. 
But for the first time it makes the mind get outside of itself and 
places it in opposition to others, not for it to get lost but to show it 
clearly the blind path that all have entered upon. In the time of the 
absurd reasoning, creation follows indifference and discovery. It 
marks the point from which absurd passions spring and where the 
reasoning stops. Its place in this essay is justified in this way. 

It will suffice to bring to light a few themes common to the 
creator and the thinker in order to find in the work of art all the 
contradictions of thought involved in the absurd. Indeed, it is not 
so much identical conclusions that prove minds to be related as the 
contradictions that are common to them. So it is with thought and 
creation. I hardly need to say that the same anguish urges man to 
these two attitudes. This is where they coincide in the beginning. 



But among all the thoughts that start from the absurd, I have seen 
that very few remain within it. And through their deviations or 
infidelities I have best been able to measure what belonged to the 
absurd. Similarly I must wonder: is an absurd work of art possible? 

* 

It would be impossible to insist too much on the arbitrary 
nature of the former opposition between art and philosophy. If you 
insist on taking it in too limited a sense, it is certainly false. If you 
mean merely that these two disciplines each have their peculiar 
climate, that is probably true but remains vague. The only 
acceptable argument used to he in the contradiction brought up 
between the philosopher enclosed within his system and the artist 
placed before his work. But this was pertinent for a certain form of 
art and of philosophy which we consider secondary here. The idea 
of an art detached from its creator is not only outmoded; it is false. 
In opposition to the artist, it is pointed out that no philosopher ever 
created several systems. But that is true in so far, indeed, as no 
artist ever expressed more than one thing under different aspects. 
The instantaneous perfection of art, the necessity for its renewal— 
this is true only through a preconceived notion. For the work of art 
likewise is a construction and everyone knows how monotonous 
the great creators can be. For the same reason as the thinker, the 
artist commits himself and becomes himself in his work. That 
osmosis raises the most important of aesthetic problems. 
Moreover, to anyone who is convinced of the mind’s singleness of 
purpose, nothing is more futile than these distinctions based on 
methods and objects. There are no frontiers between the disciplines 
that man sets himself for understanding and loving. They interlock, 
and the same anxiety merges them. 

It is necessary to state this to begin with. For an absurd work of 
art to be possible, thought in its most lucid form must be involved 
in it. But at the same time thought must not be apparent except as 
the regulating intelligence. This paradox can be explained 
according to the absurd. The work of art is born of the 
intelligence’s refusal to reason the concrete. It marks the triumph 
of the carnal. It is lucid thought that provokes it, but in that very 
act that thought repudiates itself. It will not yield to the temptation 
of adding to what is described a deeper meaning that it knows to be 
illegitimate. The work of art embodies a drama of the intelligence, 
but it proves this only indirectly. The absurd work requires an artist 



conscious of these limitations and an art in which the concrete 
signifies nothing more than itself. It cannot be the end, the 
meaning, and the consolation of a life. Creating or not creating 
changes nothing. The absurd creator does not prize his work. He 
could repudiate it. He does sometimes repudiate it. An Abyssinia 
suffices for this, as in the case of Rimbaud. 

At the same time a rule of aesthetics can be seen in this. The 
true work of art is always on the human scale. It is essentially the 
one that says “less.” There is a certain relationship between the 
global experience of the artist and the work that reflects that 
experience, between Wilhelm Meister and Goethe’s maturity. That 
relationship is bad when the work aims to give the whole 
experience in the lace-paper of an explanatory literature. That 
relationship is good when the work is but a piece cut out of 
experience, a facet of the diamond in which the inner luster is 
epitomized without being limited. In the first case there is 
overloading and pretension to the eternal. In the second, a fecund 
work because of a whole implied experience, the wealth of which 
is suspected. The problem for the absurd artist is to acquire this 
savoir-vivre which transcends savoir-faire. And in the end, the 
great artist under this climate is, above all, a great living being, it 
being understood that living in this case is just as much 
experiencing as reflecting. The work then embodies an intellectual 
drama. The absurd work illustrates thought’s renouncing of its 
prestige and its resignation to being no more than the intelligence 
that works up appearances and covers with images what has no 
reason. If the world were clear, art would not exist. 

I am not speaking here of the arts of form or color in which 
description alone prevails in its splendid modesty.^ Expression 
begins where thought ends. Those adolescents with empty 
eyesockets who people temples and museums—their philosophy 
has been expressed in gestures. For an absurd man it is more 
educative than all libraries. Under another aspect the same is true 
for music. If any art is devoid of lessons, it is certainly music. It is 
too closely related to mathematics not to have borrowed their 
gratuitousness. That game the mind plays with itself according to 
set and measured laws takes place in the sonorous compass that 
belongs to us and beyond which the vibrations nevertheless meet in 
an inhuman universe. There is no purer sensation. These examples 
are too easy. The absurd man recognizes as his own these 
harmonies and these forms. 


But I should like to speak here of a work in which the 
temptation to explain remains greatest, in which illusion offers 
itself automatically, in which conclusion is almost inevitable. I 
mean fictional creation. I propose to inquire whether or not the 
absurd can hold its own there. 

* * * 


To think is first of all to create a world (or to limit one’s own 
world, which comes to the same thing). It is starting out from the 
basic disagreement that separates man from his experience in order 
to find a common ground according to one’s nostalgia, a universe 
hedged with reasons or lighted up with analogies but which, in any 
case, gives an opportunity to rescind the unbearable divorce. The 
philosopher, even if he is Kant, is a creator. He has his characters, 
his symbols, and his secret action. He has his plot endings. On the 
contrary, the lead taken by the novel over poetry and the essay 
merely represents, despite appearances, a greater intellectualiza- 
tion of the art. Let there be no mistake about it; I am speaking of 
the greatest. The fecundity and the importance of a literary form 
are often measured by the trash it contains. The number of bad 
novels must not make us forget the value of the best. These, 
indeed, carry with them their universe. The novel has its logic, its 
reasonings, its intuition, and its postulates. It also has its 
requirements of clarity.^ 

The classical opposition of which I was speaking above is even 
less justified in this particular case. It held in the time when it was 
easy to separate philosophy from its authors. Today when thought 
has ceased to lay claim to the universal, when its best history 
would be that of its repentances, we know that the system, when it 
is worth while, cannot be separated from its author. The Ethics 
itself, in one of its aspects, is but a long and reasoned personal 
confession. Abstract thought at last returns to its prop of flesh. 
And, likewise, the fictional activities of the body and of the 
passions are regulated a little more according to the requirements 
of a vision of the world. The writer has given up telling “stories” 
and creates his universe. The great novelists are philosophical 
novelists—that is, the contrary of thesis-writers. For instance, 
Balzac, Sade, Melville, Stendhal, Dostoevsky, Proust, Malraux, 
Kafka, to cite but a few. 

But in fact the preference they have shown for writing in 
images rather than in reasoned arguments is revelatory of a certain 


thought that is common to them all, convinced of the uselessness 
of any principle of explanation and sure of the educative message 
of perceptible appearance. They consider the work of art both as an 
end and a beginning. It is the outcome of an often unexpressed 
philosophy, its illustration and its consummation. But it is 
complete only through the implications of that philosophy. It 
justifies at last that variant of an old theme that a little thought 
estranges from life whereas much thought reconciles to life. 
Incapable of refining the real, thought pauses to mimic it. The 
novel in question is the instrument of that simultaneously relative 
and inexhaustible knowledge, so like that of love. Of love, fictional 
creation has the initial wonder and the fecund rumination. 

These at least are the charms I see in it at the outset. But I saw 
them likewise in those princes of humiliated thought whose 
suicides I was later able to witness. 

What interests me, indeed, is knowing and describing the force 
that leads them back toward the common path of illusion. The 
same method will consequently help me here. The fact of having 
already utilized it will allow me to shorten my argument and to 
sum it up without delay in a particular example. I want to know 
whether, accepting a life without appeal, one can also agree to 
work and create without appeal and what is the way leading to 
these liberties. I want to liberate my universe of its phantoms and 
to people it solely with flesh-and-blood truths whose presence I 
cannot deny. I can perform absurd work, choose the creative 
attitude rather than another. But an absurd attitude, if it is to remain 
so, must remain aware of its gratuitousness. So it is with the work 
of art. If the commandments of the absurd are not respected, if the 
work does not illustrate divorce and revolt, if it sacrifices to 
illusions and arouses hope, it ceases to be gratuitous. I can no 
longer detach myself from it. My life may find a meaning in it, but 
that is trifling. It ceases to be that exercise in detachment and 
passion which crowns the splendor and futility of a man’s life. 

In the creation in which the temptation to explain is the 
strongest, can one overcome that temptation? In the fictional world 
in which awareness of the real world is keenest, can I remain 
faithful to the absurd without sacrificing to the desire to judge? So 
many questions to be taken into consideration in a last effort. It 
must be already clear what they signify. They are the last scruples 



of an awareness that fears to forsake its initial and difficult lesson 
in favor of a final illusion. What holds for creation, looked upon as 
one of the possible attitudes for the man conscious of the absurd, 
holds for all the styles of life open to him. The conqueror or the 
actor, the creator or Don Juan may forget that their exercise in 
living could not do without awareness of its mad character. One 
becomes accustomed so quickly. A man wants to earn money in 
order to be happy, and his whole effort and the best of a life are 
devoted to the earning of that money. Happiness is forgotten; the 
means are taken for the end. Likewise, the whole effort of this 
conqueror will be diverted to ambition, which was but a way 
toward a greater life. Don Juan in turn will likewise yield to his 
fate, be satisfied with that existence whose nobility is of value only 
through revolt. For one it is awareness and for the other, revolt; in 
both cases the absurd has disappeared. There is so much stubborn 
hope in the human heart. The most destitute men often end up by 
accepting illusion. That approval prompted by the need for peace 
inwardly parallels the existential consent. There are thus gods of 
light and idols of mud. But it is essential to find the middle path 
leading to the faces of man. 

So far, the failures of the absurd exigence have best informed 
us as to what it is. In the same way, if we are to be informed, it will 
suffice to notice that fictional creation can present the same 
ambiguity as certain philosophies. Hence I can choose as 
illustration a work comprising everything that denotes awareness 
of the absurd, having a clear starting-point and a lucid climate. Its 
consequences will enlighten us. If the absurd is not respected in it, 
we shall know by what expedient illusion enters in. A particular 
example, a theme, a creator’s fidelity will suffice, then. This 
involves the same analysis that has already been made at greater 
length. 

I shall examine a favorite theme of Dostoevsky. I might just as 
well have studied other works.^ But in this work the problem is 
treated directly, in the sense of nobility and emotion, as for the 
existential philosophies already discussed. This parallelism serves 
my purpose. 

Kirilov 

All of Dostoevsky’s heroes question themselves as to the 
meaning of life. In this they are modern: they do not fear ridicule. 
What distinguishes modern sensibility from classical sensibility is 


that the latter thrives on moral problems and the former on 
metaphysical problems. In Dostoevsky’s novels the question is 
propounded with such intensity that it can only invite extreme 
solutions. Existence is illusory or it is eternal. If Dostoevsky were 
satisfied with this inquiry, he would be a philosopher. But he 
illustrates the consequences that such intellectual pastimes may 
have in a man’s life, and in this regard he is an artist. Among those 
consequences, his attention is arrested particularly by the last one, 
which he himself calls logical suicide in his Diary of a Writer. In 
the installments for December 1876, indeed, he imagines the 
reasoning of “logical suicide.” Convinced that human existence is 
an utter absurdity for anyone without faith in immortality, the 
desperate man comes to the following conclusions: 

“Since in reply to my questions about happiness, I am told, 
through the intermediary of my consciousness, that I cannot be 
happy except in harmony with the great all, which I cannot 
conceive and shall never be in a position to conceive, it is evident 

“Since, finally, in this connection, I assume both the role of the 
plaintiff and that of the defendant, of the accused and of the judge, 
and since I consider this comedy perpetrated by nature altogether 
stupid, and since I even deem it humiliating for me to deign to play 
it...” 

“In my indisputable capacity of plaintiff and defendant, of 
judge and accused, I condemn that nature which, with such 
impudent nerve, brought me into being in order to suffer—I 
condemn it to be annihilated with me.” 

There remains a little humor in that position. This suicide kills 
himself because, on the metaphysical plane, he is vexed. In a 
certain sense he is taking his revenge. This is his way of proving 
that he “will not be had.” It is known, however, that the same 
theme is embodied, but with the most wonderful generality, in 
Kirilov of The Possessed likewise an advocate of logical suicide. 
Kirilov the engineer declares somewhere that he wants to take his 
own life because it “is his idea.” Obviously the word must be taken 
in its proper sense. It is for an idea, a thought, that he is getting 
ready for death. This is the superior suicide. Progressively, in a 
series of scenes in which Kirilov’s mask is gradually illuminated, 
the fatal thought driving him is revealed to us. The engineer, in 
fact, goes back to the arguments of the Diary. He feels that God is 
necessary and that he must exist. But he knows that he does not 



and cannot exist. “Why do you not realize,” he exclaims, “that this 
is sufficient reason for killing oneself?” That attitude involves 
likewise for him some of the absurd consequences. Through 
indifference he accepts letting his suicide be used to the advantage 
of a cause he despises. “I decided last night that I didn’t care.” And 
finally he prepares his deed with a mixed feeling of revolt and 
freedom. “I shall kill myself in order to assert my insubordination, 
my new and dreadful liberty.” It is no longer a question of revenge, 
but of revolt. Kirilov is consequently an absurd character—yet 
with this essential reservation: he kills himself. But he himself 
explains this contradiction, and in such a way that at the same time 
he reveals the absurd secret in all its purity. In truth, he adds to his 
fatal logic an extraordinary ambition which gives the character its 
full perspective: he wants to kill himself to become god. 

The reasoning is classic in its clarity. If God does not exist, 
Kirilov is god. If God does not exist, Kirilov must kill himself. 
Kirilov must therefore kill himself to become god. That logic is 
absurd, but it is what is needed. The interesting thing, however, is 
to give a meaning to that divinity brought to earth. That amounts to 
clarifying the premise: “If God does not exist, I am god,” which 
still remains rather obscure. It is important to note at the outset that 
the man who flaunts that mad claim is indeed of this world. He 
performs his gymnastics every morning to preserve his health. He 
is stirred by the joy of Chatov recovering his wife. On a sheet of 
paper to be found after his death he wants to draw a face sticking 
out his tongue at “them.” He is childish and irascible, passionate, 
methodical, and sensitive. Of the superman he has nothing but the 
logic and the obsession, whereas of man he has the whole 
catalogue. Yet it is he who speaks calmly of his divinity. He is not 
mad, or else Dostoevsky is. Consequently it is not a 
megalomaniac’s illusion that excites him. And taking the words in 
their specific sense would, in this instance, be ridiculous. 

Kirilov himself helps us to understand. In reply to a question 
from Stavrogin, he makes clear that he is not talking of a god-man. 
It might be thought that this springs from concern to distinguish 
himself from Christ. But in reality it is a matter of annexing Christ. 
Kirilov in fact fancies for a moment that Jesus at his death did not 
find himself in Paradise. He found out then that his torture had 
been useless. “The laws of nature,” says the engineer, “made 
Christ live in the midst of falsehood and die for a falsehood.” 
Solely in this sense Jesus indeed personifies the whole human 



drama. He is the complete man, being the one who realized the 
most absurd condition. He is not the God-man but the man-god. 
And, like him, each of us can be crucified and victimized—and is 
to a certain degree. 

The divinity in question is therefore altogether terrestrial. “For 
three years,” says Kirilov, “I sought the attribute of my divinity 
and I have found it. The attribute of my divinity is independence.” 
Now can be seen the meaning of Kirilov’s premise: “If God does 
not exist, I am god.” To become god is merely to be free on this 
earth, not to serve an immortal being. Above all, of course, it is 
drawing all the inferences from that painful independence. If God 
exists, all depends on him and we can do nothing against his will. 
If he does not exist, everything depends on us. For Kirilov, as for 
Nietzsche, to kill God is to become god oneself; it is to realize on 
this earth the eternal life of which the Gospel speaks.^ But if this 
metaphysical crime is enough for man’s fulfillment, why add 
suicide? Why kill oneself and leave this world after having won 
freedom? That is contradictory. Kirilov is well aware of this, for he 
adds: “If you feel that, you are a tsar and, far from killing yourself, 
you will live covered with glory.” But men in general do not kn ow 
it. They do not feel “that.” As in the time of Prometheus, they 
entertain blind hopes.^ They need to be shown the way and 
cannot do without preaching. Consequently, Kirilov must kill 
himself out of love for humanity. He must show his brothers a 
royal and difficult path on which he will be the first. It is a 
pedagogical suicide. Kirilov sacrifices himself, then. But if he is 
crucified, he will not be victimized. He remains the man-god, 
convinced of a death without future, imbued with evangelical 
melancholy. “I,” he says, “am unhappy because I am obliged to 
assert my freedom.” 

But once he is dead and men are at last enlightened, this earth 
will be peopled with tsars and lighted up with human glory. 
Kirilov’s pistol shot will be the signal for the last revolution. Thus, 
it is not despair that urges him to death, but love of his neighbor 
for his own sake. Before terminating in blood an indescribable 
spiritual adventure, Kirilov makes a remark as old as human 
suffering: “All is well.” 

This theme of suicide in Dostoevsky, then, is indeed an absurd 
theme. Let us merely note before going on that Kirilov reappears in 
other characters who themselves set in motion additional absurd 
themes. Stavrogin and Ivan Karamazov try out the absurd truths in 


practical life. They are the ones liberated by Kirilov’s death. They 
try their skill at being tsars. Stavrogin leads an “ironic” life, and it 
is well known in what regard. He arouses hatred around him. And 
yet the key to the character is found in his farewell letter: “I have 
not been able to detest anything.” He is a tsar in indifference. Ivan 
is likewise by refusing to surrender the royal powers of the mind. 
To those who, like his brother, prove by their lives that it is 
essential to humiliate oneself in order to believe, he might reply 
that the condition is shameful. His key word is: “Everything is 
permitted,” with the appropriate shade of melancholy. Of course, 
like Nietzsche, the most famous of God’s assassins, he ends in 
madness. But this is a risk worth running, and, faced with such 
tragic ends, the essential impulse of the absurd mind is to ask: 
“What does that prove?” 

* * * 

Thus the novels, like the Diary, propound the absurd question. 
They establish logic unto death, exaltation, “dreadful” freedom, the 
glory of the tsars become human. All is well, everything is 
permitted, and nothing is hateful—these are absurd judgments. But 
what an amazing creation in which those creatures of fire and ice 
seem so familiar to us. The passionate world of indifference that 
rumbles in their hearts does not seem at all monstrous to us. We 
recognize in it our everyday anxieties. And probably no one so 
much as Dostoevsky has managed to give the absurd world such 
familiar and tormenting charms. 

Yet what is his conclusion? Two quotations will show the 
complete metaphysical reversal that leads the writer to other 
revelations. The argument of the one who commits logical suicide 
having provoked protests from the critics, Dostoevsky in the 
following installments of the Diary amplifies his position and 
concludes thus: “If faith in immortality is so necessary to the 
human being (that without it he comes to the point of killing 
himself), it must therefore be the normal state of humanity. Since 
this is the case, the immortality of the human soul exists without 
any doubt.” Then again in the last pages of his last novel, at the 
conclusion of that gigantic combat with God, some children ask 
Aliocha: “Karamazov, is it true what religion says, that we shall 
rise from the dead, that we shall see one another again?” And 
Aliocha answers: “Certainly, we shall see one another again, we 
shall joyfully tell one another everything that has happened.” 



Thus Kirilov, Stavrogin, and Ivan are defeated. The Brothers 
Karamazov replies to The Possessed. And it is indeed a conclusion. 
Aliocha’s case is not ambiguous, as is that of Prince Muichkin. Ill, 
the latter lives in a perpetual present, tinged with smiles and 
indifference, and that blissful state might be the eternal life of 
which the Prince speaks. On the contrary, Aliocha clearly says: 
“We shall meet again.” There is no longer any question of suicide 
and of madness. What is the use, for anyone who is sure of 
immortality and of its joys? Man exchanges his divinity for 
happiness. “We shall joyfully tell one another everything that has 
happened.” Thus again Kirilov’s pistol rang out somewhere in 
Russia, but the world continued to cherish its blind hopes. Men did 
not understand “that.” 

Consequently, it is not an absurd novelist addressing us, but an 
existential novelist. Here, too, the leap is touching and gives its 
nobility to the art that inspires it. It is a stirring acquiescence, 
riddled with doubts, uncertain and ardent. Speaking of The 
Brothers Karamazov, Dostoevsky wrote: “The chief question that 
will be pursued throughout this book is the very one from which I 
have suffered consciously or unconsciously all life long: the 
existence of God.” It is hard to believe that a novel sufficed to 
transform into joyful certainty the suffering of a lifetime. One 
commentator^ correctly pointed out that Dostoevsky is on Ivan’s 
side and that the affirmative chapters took three months of effort 
whereas what he called “the blasphemies” were written in three 
weeks in a state of excitement. There is not one of his characters 
who does not have that thorn in the flesh, who does not aggravate 
it or seek a remedy for it in sensation or immortality.^ In any 
case, let us remain with this doubt. Here is a work which, in a 
chiaroscuro more gripping than the light of day, permits us to seize 
man’s struggle against his hopes. Having reached the end, the 
creator makes his choice against his characters. That contradiction 
thus allows us to make a distinction. It is not an absurd work that is 
involved here, but a work that propounds the absurd problem. 

Dostoevsky’s reply is humiliation, “shame” according to 
Stavrogin. An absurd work, on the contrary, does not provide a 
reply; that is the whole difference. Let us note this carefully in 
conclusion: what contradicts the absurd in that work is not its 
Christian character, but rather its announcing a future life. It is 
possible to be Christian and absurd. There are examples of 
Christians who do not believe in a future life. In regard to the work 


of art, it should therefore be possible to define one of the directions 
of the absurd analysis that could have been anticipated in the 
preceding pages. It leads to propounding “the absurdity of the 
Gospel.” It throws light upon this idea, fertile in repercussions, that 
convictions do not prevent incredulity. On the contrary, it is easy 
to see that the author of The Possessed, familiar with these paths, 
in conclusion took a quite different way. The surprising reply of 
the creator to his characters, of Do-stoevsky to Kirilov, can indeed 
be summed up thus: existence is illusory and it is eternal. 

Ephemeral Creation 

At this point I perceive, therefore, that hope cannot be eluded 
forever and that it can beset even those who wanted to be free of it. 
This is the interest I find in the works discussed up to this point. I 
could, at least in the realm of creation, list some truly absurd 
works.^ But everything must have a beginning. The object of this 
quest is a certain fidelity. The Church has been so harsh with 
heretics only because she deemed that there is no worse enemy 
than a child who has gone astray. But the record of Gnostic 
effronteries and the persistence of Manichean currents have 
contributed more to the construction of orthodox dogma than all 
the prayers. With due allowance, the same is true of the absurd. 
One recognizes one’s course by discovering the paths that stray 
from it. At the very conclusion of the absurd reasoning, in one of 
the attitudes dictated by its logic, it is not a matter of indifference 
to find hope coming back in under one of its most touching guises. 
That shows the difficulty of the absurd ascesis. Above all, it shows 
the necessity of unfailing alertness and thus confirms the general 
plan of this essay. 

But if it is still too early to list absurd works, at least a 
conclusion can be reached as to the creative attitude, one of those 
which can complete absurd existence. Art can never be so well 
served as by a negative thought. Its dark and humiliated 
proceedings are as necessary to the understanding of a great work 
as black is to white. To work and create “for nothing,” to sculpture 
in clay, to know that one’s creation has no future, to see one’s 
work destroyed in a day while being aware that fundamentally this 
has no more importance than building for centuries—this is the 
difficult wisdom that absurd thought sanctions. Performing these 
two tasks simultaneously, negating on the one hand and 


magnifying on the other, is the way open to the absurd creator. He 
must give the void its colors. 

This leads to a special conception of the work of art. Too often 
the work of a creator is looked upon as a series of isolated 
testimonies. Thus, artist and man of letters are confused. A 
profound thought is in a constant state of becoming; it adopts the 
experience of a life and assumes its shape, likewise, a man’s sole 
creation is strengthened in its successive and multiple aspects: his 
works. One after another, they complement one an-other, correct or 
overtake one another, contradict one another too. If something 
brings creation to an end, it is not the victorious and illusory cry of 
the blinded artist: “I have said everything,” but the death of the 
creator which closes his experience and the book of his genius. 

That effort, that superhuman consciousness are not necessarily 
apparent to the reader. There is no mystery in human creation. Will 
performs this miracle. But at least there is no true creation without 
a secret. To be sure, a succession of works can be but a series of 
approximations of the same thought. But it is possible to conceive 
of another type of creator proceeding by juxtaposition. Their works 
may seem to be devoid of interrelations. To a certain degree, they 
are contradictory. 

But viewed all together, they resume their natural grouping. 
From death, for instance, they derive their definitive significance. 
They receive their most obvious light from the very life of their 
author. At the moment of death, the succession of his works is but 
a collection of failures. But if those failures all have the same 
resonance, the creator has managed to repeat the image of his own 
condition, to make the air echo with the sterile secret he possesses. 

The effort to dominate is considerable here. But human 
intelligence is up to much more. It will merely indicate clearly the 
voluntary aspect of creation. Elsewhere I have brought out the fact 
that human will had no other purpose than to maintain awareness. 
But that could not do without discipline. Of all the schools of 
patience and lucidity, creation is the most effective. It is also the 
staggering evidence of man’s sole dignity: the dogged revolt 
against his condition, perseverance in an effort considered sterile. 
It calls for a daily effort, self-mastery, a precise estimate of the 
limits of truth, measure, and strength. It constitutes an ascesis. All 
that “for nothing,” in order to repeat and mark time. But perhaps 
the great work of art has less importance in itself than in the ordeal 
it demands of a man and the opportunity it provides him of 



overcoming his phantoms and approaching a little closer to his 
naked reality. 

H= * 

Let there be no mistake in aesthetics. It is not patient inquiry, 
the unceasing, sterile illustration of a thesis that I am calling for 
here. Quite the contrary, if I have made myself clearly understood. 
The thesis-novel, the work that proves, the most hateful of all, is 
the one that most often is inspired by a smug thought. You 
demonstrate the truth you feel sure of possessing. But those are 
ideas one launches, and ideas are the contrary of thought. Those 
creators are philosophers, ashamed of themselves. Those I am 
speaking of or whom I imagine are, on the contrary, lucid thinkers. 
At a certain point where thought turns back on itself, they raise up 
the images of their works like the obvious symbols of a limited, 
mortal, and rebellious thought. 

They perhaps prove something. But those proofs are ones that 
the novelists provide for themselves rather than for the world in 
general. The essential is that the novelists should triumph in the 
concrete and that this constitute their nobility. This wholly carnal 
triumph has been prepared for them by a thought in which abstract 
powers have been humiliated. When they are completely so, at the 
same time the flesh makes the creation shine forth in all its absurd 
luster. After all, ironic philosophies produce passionate works. 

Any thought that abandons unity glorifies diversity. And 
diversity is the home of art. The only thought to liberate the mind 
is that which leaves it alone, certain of its limits and of its 
impending end. No doctrine tempts it. It awaits the ripening of the 
work and of life. Detached from it, the work will once more give a 
barely muffled voice to a soul Forever freed from hope. Or it will 
give voice to nothing if the creator, tired of his activity, intends to 
turn away. That is equivalent. 

Thus, I ask of absurd creation what I required from thought— 
revolt, freedom, and diversity. Later on it will manifest its utter 
futility. In that daily effort in which intelligence and passion 
mingle and delight each other, the absurd man discovers a 
discipline that will make up the greatest of his strengths. The 
required diligence, the doggedness and lucidity thus resemble the 
conqueror’s attitude. To create is likewise to give a shape to one’s 
fate. For all these characters, their work defines them at least as 



much as it is defined by them. The actor taught us this: there is no 
frontier between being and appearing. 

Let me repeat. None of all this has any real meaning. On the 
way to that liberty, there is still a progress to be made. The final 
effort for these related minds, creator or conqueror, is to manage to 
free themselves also from their undertakings: succeed in granting 
that the very work, whether it be conquest, love, or creation, may 
well not be; consummate thus the utter futility of any individual 
life. Indeed, that gives them more freedom in the realization of that 
work, just as becoming aware of the absurdity of life authorized 
them to plunge into it with every excess. 

All that remains is a fate whose outcome alone is fatal. Outside 
of that single fatality of death, everything, joy or happiness, is 
liberty. A world remains of which man is the sole master. What 
bound him was the illusion of another world. The outcome of his 
thought, ceasing to be renunciatory, flowers in images. It frolics— 
in myths, to be sure, but myths with no other depth than that of 
human suffering and, like it, inexhaustible. Not the divine fable 
that amuses and blinds, but the terrestrial face, gesture, and drama 
in which are summed up a difficult wisdom and an ephemeral 
passion. 

The Myth Of Sisyphus 

The gods had condemned Sisyphus to ceaselessly rolling a rock 
to the top of a mountain, whence the stone would fall back of its 
own weight. They had thought with some reason that there is no 
more dreadful punishment than futile and hopeless labor. 

If one believes Homer, Sisyphus was the wisest and most 
prudent of mortals. According to another tradition, however, he 
was disposed to practice the profession of highwayman. I see no 
contradiction in this. Opinions differ as to the reasons why he 
became the futile laborer of the underworld. To begin with, he is 
accused of a certain levity in regard to the gods. He stole their 
secrets. AEgina, the daughter of AEsopus, was carried off by 
Jupiter. The father was shocked by that disappearance and 
complained to Sisyphus. He, who knew of the abduction, offered 
to tell about it on condition that AEsopus would give water to the 
citadel of Corinth. To the celestial thunderbolts he preferred the 
benediction of water. He was punished for this in the underworld. 
Homer tells us also that Sisyphus had put Death in chains. Pluto 
could not endure the sight of his deserted, silent empire. He 



dispatched the god of war, who liberated Death from the hands of 
her conqueror. 

It is said also that Sisyphus, being near to death, rashly wanted 
to test his wife’s love. He ordered her to cast his unburied body 
into the middle of the public square. Sisyphus woke up in the 
underworld. And there, annoyed by an obedience so contrary to 
human love, he obtained from Pluto permission to return to earth in 
order to chastise his wife. But when he had seen again the face of 
this world, enjoyed water and sun, warm stones and the sea, he no 
longer wanted to go back to the infernal darkness. Recalls, signs of 
anger, warnings were of no avail. Many years more he lived facing 
the curve of the gulf, the sparkling sea, and the smiles of earth. A 
decree of the gods was necessary. Mercury came and seized the 
impudent man by the collar and, snatching him from his joys, led 
him forcibly back to the underworld, where his rock was ready for 
him. 

You have already grasped that Sisyphus is the absurd hero. He 
is, as much through his passions as through his torture. His scorn 
of the gods, his hatred of death, and his passion for life won him 
that unspeakable penalty in which the whole being is exerted 
toward accomplishing nothing. This is the price that must be paid 
for the passions of this earth. Nothing is told us about Sisyphus in 
the underworld. Myths are made for the imagination to breathe life 
into them. As for this myth, one sees merely the whole effort of a 
body straining to raise the huge stone, to roll it and push it up a 
slope a hundred times over; one sees the face screwed up, the 
cheek tight against the stone, the shoulder bracing the clay-covered 
mass, the foot wedging it, the fresh start with arms outstretched, 
the wholly human security of two earth-clotted hands. At the very 
end of his long effort measured by skyless space and time without 
depth, the purpose is achieved. Then Sisyphus watches the stone 
rush down in a few moments toward that lower world whence he 
will have to push it up again toward the summit. He goes back 
down to the plain. 

It is during that return, that pause, that Sisyphus interests me. A 
face that toils so close to stones is already stone itself! I see that 
man going back down with a heavy yet measured step toward the 
torment of which he will never know the end. That hour like a 
breathing-space which returns as surely as his suffering, that is the 
hour of consciousness. At each of those moments when he leaves 



the heights and gradually sinks toward the lairs of the gods, he is 
superior to his fate. He is stronger than his rock. 

If this myth is tragic, that is because its hero is conscious. 
Where would his torture be, indeed, if at every step the hope of 
succeeding upheld him? The workman of today works every day in 
his life at the same tasks, and this fate is no less absurd. But it is 
tragic only at the rare moments when it becomes conscious. 
Sisyphus, proletarian of the gods, powerless and rebellious, knows 
the whole extent of his wretched condition: it is what he thi nk s of 
during his descent. The lucidity that was to constitute his torture at 
the same time crowns his victory. There is no fate that cannot be 
surmounted by scorn. 

* * * 

If the descent is thus sometimes performed in sorrow, it can 
also take place in joy. This word is not too much. Again I fancy 
Sisyphus returning toward his rock, and the sorrow was in the 
beginning. When the images of earth cling too tightly to memory, 
when the call of happiness becomes too insistent, it happens that 
melancholy rises in man’s heart: this is the rock’s victory, this is 
the rock itself. The boundless grief is too heavy to bear. These are 
our nights of Gethsemane. But crushing truths perish from being 
acknowledged. Thus, CEdipus at the outset obeys fate without 
knowing it. But from the moment he knows, his tragedy begins. 
Yet at the same moment, blind and desperate, he realizes that the 
only bond linking him to the world is the cool hand of a girl. Then 
a tremendous remark rings out: “Despite so many ordeals, my 
advanced age and the nobility of my soul make me conclude that 
all is well.” Sophocles’ CEdipus, like Dostoevsky’s Kirilov, thus 
gives the recipe for the absurd victory. Ancient wisdom confirms 
modern heroism. 

One does not discover the absurd without being tempted to 
write a manual of happiness. “What! by such narrow ways—?” 
There is but one world, however. Happiness and the absurd are two 
sons of the same earth. They are inseparable. It would be a mistake 
to say that happiness necessarily springs from the absurd 
discovery. It happens as well that the feeling of the absurd springs 
from happiness. “I conclude that all is well,” says CEdipus, and 
that remark is sacred. It echoes in the wild and limited universe of 
man. It teaches that all is not, has not been, exhausted. It drives out 
of this world a god who had come into it with dissatisfaction and a 



preference for futile sufferings. It makes of fate a human matter, 
which must be settled among men. 

All Sisyphus’ silent joy is contained therein. His fate belongs 
to him. His rock is his thing. Likewise, the absurd man, when he 
contemplates his tonnent, silences all the idols. In the universe 
suddenly restored to its silence, the myriad wondering little voices 
of the earth rise up. Unconscious, secret calls, invitations from all 
the faces, they are the necessary reverse and price of victory. There 
is no sun without shadow, and it is es-sential to know the night. 
The absurd man says yes and his effort will henceforth be 
unceasing. If there is a personal fate, there is no higher destiny, or 
at least there is but one which he concludes is inevitable and 
despicable. For the rest, he knows himself to be the master of his 
days. At that subtle moment when man glances backward over his 
life, Sisyphus returning toward his rock, in that slight pivoting he 
contemplates that series of unrelated actions which becomes his 
fate, created by him, combined under his memory’s eye and soon 
sealed by his death. Thus, convinced of the wholly human origin of 
all that is human, a blind man eager to see who knows that the 
night has no end, he is still on the go. The rock is still rolling. 

I leave Sisyphus at the foot of the mountain! One always finds 
one’s burden again. But Sisyphus teaches the higher fidelity that 
negates the gods and raises rocks. He too concludes that all is well. 
This universe henceforth without a master seems to him neither 
sterile nor futile. Each atom of that stone, each mineral flake of 
that night-filled mountain, in itself forms a world. The struggle 
itself toward the heights is enough to fill a man’s heart. One must 
imagine Sisyphus happy.An Absurd Reasoning
Absurdity and Suicide
There is but one truly serious philosophical problem, and that
is suicide. Judging whether life is or is not worth living amounts to
answering the fundamental question of philosophy. All the rest—
whether or not the world has three dimensions, whether the mind
has nine or twelve categories—comes afterwards. These are
games; one must first answer. And if it is true, as Nietzsche claims,
that a philosopher, to deserve our respect, must preach by example,
you can appreciate the importance of that reply, for it will precede
the definitive act. These are facts the heart can feel; yet they call
for careful study before they become clear to the intellect.
If I ask myself how to judge that this question is more urgent
than that, I reply that one judges by the actions it entails. I have
never seen anyone die for the ontologi-cal argument. Galileo, who
held a scientific truth of great importance, abjured it with the
greatest ease as soon as it endangered his life. In a certain sense, he
did rightThat truth was not worth the stake. Whether the earth
or the sun revolves around the other is a matter of profound
indifference. To tell the truth, it is a futile question. On the other
hand, I see many people die because they judge that life is not
worth living. I see others paradoxically getting killed for the ideas
or illusions that give them a reason for living (what is called a
reason for living is also an excellent reason for dying). I therefore
conclude that the meaning of life is the most urgent of questions.
How to answer it? On all essential problems (I mean thereby those
that run the risk of leading to death or those that intensify the
passion of living) there are probably but two methods of thought:
the method of La Palisse and the method of Don Quixote. Solely
the balance between evidence and lyricism can allow us to achieve
simultaneously emotion and lucidity. In a subject at once so
humble and so heavy with emotion, the learned and classical
dialectic must yield, one can see, to a more modest attitude of mind
deriving at one and the same time from common sense and
understanding.
Suicide has never been dealt with except as a social
phenomenon. On the contrary, we are concerned here, at the outset,
with the relationship between individual thought and suicide. An
act like this is prepared within the silence of the heart, as is a great
work of art. The man himself is ignorant of it. One evening he
pulls the trigger or jumps. Of an apartment-building manager who
had killed himself I was told that he had lost his daughter five
years before, that be bad changed greatly since, and that that
experience had “undermined” him. A more exact word cannot be
imagined. Beginning to think is beginning to be undermined.
Society has but little connection with such beginnings. The worm
is in man’s heart. That is where it must be sought. One must follow
and understand this fatal game that leads from lucidity in the face
of existence to flight from light.
There are many causes for a suicide, and generally the most
obvious ones were not the most powerful. Rarely is suicide
committed (yet the hypothesis is not excluded) through reflection.
What sets off the crisis is almost always unverifiable. Newspapers
often speak of “personal sorrows” or of “incurable illness.” These
explanations are plausible. But one would have to know whether a
friend of the desperate man had not that very day addressed him
indifferently. He is the guilty one. For that is enough to precipitate
all the rancors and all the boredom still in suspension.^
But if it is hard to fix the precise instant, the subtle step when
the mind opted for death, it is easier to deduce from the act itself
the consequences it implies. In a sense, and as in melodrama,
killing yourself amounts to confessing. It is confessing that life is
too much for you or that you do not understand it. Let’s not go too
far in such analogies, however, but rather return to everyday
words. It is merely confessing that that “is not worth the trouble.”
Living, naturally, is never easy. You continue making the gestures
commanded by existence for many reasons, the first of which is
habit. Dying voluntarily implies that you have recognized, even
instinc—
tively, the ridiculous character of that habit, the absence of any
profound reason for living, the insane character of that daily
agitation, and the uselessness of suffering.
What, then, is that incalculable feeling that deprives the mind
of the sleep necessary to life? A world that can be explained even
with bad reasons is a familiar world. But, on the other hand, in a
universe suddenly divested of illusions and lights, man feels an
alien, a stranger. His exile is without remedy since he is deprived
of the memory of a lost home or the hope of a promised land. This
divorce between man and this life, the actor and his setting, is
properly the feeling of absurdity. All healthy men having thought
of their own suicide, it can be seen, without further explanation,
that there is a direct connection between this feeling and the
longing for death.
The subject of this essay is precisely this relationship between
the absurd and suicide, the exact degree to which suicide is a
solution to the absurd. The principle can be established that for a
man who does not cheat, what he believes to be true must
detennine his action. Belief in the absurdity of existence must then
dictate his conduct. It is legitimate to wonder, clearly and without
false pathos, whether a conclusion of this importance requires
forsaking as rapidly as possible an incomprehensible condition. I
am speaking, of course, of men inclined to be in harmony with
themselves.
Stated clearly, this problem may seem both simple and
insoluble. But it is wrongly assumed that simple questions involve
answers that are no less simple and that evidence implies evidence.
A priori and reversing the terms of the problem, just as one does or
does not kill oneself, it seems that there are but two philosophical
solutions, either yes or no. This would be too easy. But allowance
must be made for those who, without concluding, continue
questioning. Here I am only slightly indulging in irony: this is the
majority. I notice also that those who answer “no” act as if they
thought “yes.” As a matter of fact, if I accept the Nietzschean
criterion, they think “yes” in one way or another. On the other
hand, it often happens that those who commit suicide were assured
of the meaning of life. These contradictions are constant. It may
even be said that they have never been so keen as on this point
where, on the contrary, logic seems so desirable. It is a
commonplace to compare philosophical theories and the behavior
of those who profess them. But it must be said that of the thinkers
who refused a meaning to life none except Kirilov who belongs to
literature, Peregrinos who is born of legend, m and Jules Lequier
who belongs to hypothesis, admitted his logic to the point of
refusing that life. Schopenhauer is often cited, as a fit subject for
laughter, because he praised suicide while seated at a well-set
table. This is no subject for joking. That way of not taking the
tragic seriously is not so grievous, but it helps to judge a man.
In the face of such contradictions and obscurities must we
conclude that there is no relationship between the opinion one has
about life and the act one commits to leave it? Let us not
exaggerate in this direction. In a man’s attachment to life there is
something stronger than all the ills in the world. The body’s
judgment is as good as the mind’s and the body shrinks from
annihilation. We get into the habit of living before acquiring the
habit of thinking. In that race which daily hastens us toward death,
the body maintains its irreparable lead. In short, the essence of that
contradiction lies in what I shall call the act of eluding because it is
both less and more than diversion in the Pascalian sense. Eluding is
the invariable game. The typical act of eluding, the fatal evasion
that constitutes the third theme of this essay, is hope. Hope of
another life one must “deserve” or trickery of those who live not
for life itself but for some great idea that will transcend it, refine it,
give it a meaning, and betray it.
Thus everything contributes to spreading confusion.
Hitherto, and it has not been wasted effort, people have played
on words and pretended to believe that refusing to grant a meaning
to life necessarily leads to declaring that it is not worth living. In
truth, there is no necessary common measure between these two
judgments. One merely has to refuse to he misled by the
confusions, divorces, and inconsistencies previously pointed out.
One must brush everything aside and go straight to the real
problem. One kills oneself because life is not worth living, that is
certainly a truth yet an unfruitful one because it is a truism. But
does that insult to existence, that flat denial in which it is plunged
come from the fact that it has no meaning? Does its absurdity
require one to escape it through hope or suicide—this is what must
be clarified, hunted down, and elucidated while brushing aside all
the rest. Does the Absurd dictate death? This problem must be
given priority over others, outside all methods of thought and all
exercises of the disinterested mind. Shades of meaning,
contradictions, the psychology that an “objective” mind can always
introduce into all problems have no place in this pursuit and this
passion. It calls simply for an unjust—in other words, logical—
thought. That is not easy. It is always easy to be logical. It is
almost impossible to be logical to the bitter end. Men who die by
their own hand consequently follow to its conclusion their
emotional inclination. Reflection on suicide gives me an
opportunity to raise the only problem to interest me: is there a logic
to the point of death? I cannot know unless I pursue, without
reckless passion, in the sole light of evidence, the reasoning of
which I am here suggesting the source. This is what I call an
absurd reasoning. Many have begun it. I do not yet know whether
or not they kept to it.
When Karl Jaspers, revealing the impossibility of constituting
the world as a unity, exclaims: “This limitation leads me to myself,
where I can no longer withdraw behind an objective point of view
that I am merely representing, where neither I myself nor the
existence of others can any longer become an object for me,” he is
evoking after many others those waterless deserts where thought
reaches its confines. After many others, yes indeed, but how eager
they were to get out of them! At that last crossroad where thought
hesitates, many men have arrived and even some of the humblest.
They then abdicated what was most precious to them, their life.
Others, princes of the mind, abdicated likewise, but they initiated
the suicide of their thought in its purest revolt. The real effort is to
stay there, rather, in so far as that is possible, and to examine
closely the odd vegetation of those distant regions. Tenacity and
acumen are privileged spectators of this inhuman show in which
absurdity, hope, and death carry on their dialogue. The mind can
then analyze the figures of that elementary yet subtle dance before
illustrating them and reliving them itself.
Absurd Walls
Like great works, deep feelings always mean more than they
are conscious of saying. The regularity of an impulse or a repulsion
in a soul is encountered again in habits of doing or thinking, is
reproduced in consequences of which the soul itself knows
nothing. Great feelings take with them their own universe, splendid
or abject. They light up with their passion an exclusive world in
which they recognize their climate. There is a universe of jealousy,
of ambition, of selfishness, or of generosity. A universe in other
words, a metaphysic and an attitude of mind. What is true of
already specialized feelings will be even more so of emotions
basically as indeterminate, simultaneously as vague and as
“definite,” as remote and as “present” as those furnished us by
beauty or aroused by absurdity.
At any streetcorner the feeling of absurdity can strike any man
in the face. As it is, in its distressing nudity, in its light without
effulgence, it is elusive. But that very difficulty deserves reflection.
It is probably true that a man remains forever unknown to us and
that there is in him something irreducible that escapes us. But
practically I know men and recognize them by their behavior, by
the totality of their deeds, by the consequences caused in life by
their presence. Likewise, all those irrational feelings which offer
no purchase to analysis. I can define them practically, appreciate
them practically, by gathering together the sum of their
consequences in the domain of the intelligence, by seizing and
noting all their aspects, by outlining their universe. It is certain that
apparently, though I have seen the same actor a hundred times, I
shall not for that reason know him any better personally. Yet if I
add up the heroes he has personified and if I say that I know him a
little better at the hundredth character counted off, this will be felt
to contain an element of truth. For this apparent paradox is also an
apologue. There is a moral to it. It teaches that a man defines
himself by his make-believe as well as by his sincere impulses.
There is thus a lower key of feelings, inaccessible in the heart but
partially disclosed by the acts they imply and the attitudes of mind
they assume. It is clear that in this way I am defining a method.
But it is also evident that that method is one of analysis and not of
knowledge. For methods imply metaphysics; unconsciously they
disclose conclusions that they often claim not to know yet.
Similarly, the last pages of a book are already contained in the first
pages. Such a link is inevitable. The method defined here
acknowledges the feeling that all true knowledge is impossible.
Solely appearances can be enumerated and the climate make itself
felt.
Perhaps we shall be able to overtake that elusive feeling of
absurdity in the different but closely related worlds of intelligence,
of the art of living, or of art itself. The climate of absurdity is in the
beginning. The end is the absurd universe and that attitude of mind
which lights the world with its true colors to bring out the
privileged and implacable visage which that attitude has discerned
in it.
H= *
All great deeds and all great thoughts have a ridiculous
beginning. Great works are often born on a street-comer or in a
restaurant’s revolving door. So it is with absurdity. The absurd
world more than others derives its nobility from that abject birth.
In certain situations, replying “nothing” when asked what one is
thinking about may be pretense in a man. Those who are loved are
well aware of this. But if that reply is sincere, if it symbolizes that
odd state of soul in which the void be-comes eloquent, in which
the chain of daily gestures is broken, in which the heart vainly
seeks the link that will connect it again, then it is as it were the first
sign of absurdity.
It happens that the stage sets collapse. Rising, streetcar, four
hours in the office or the factory, meal, streetcar, four hours of
work, meal, sleep, and Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday
Friday and Saturday accord—
ing to the same rhythm—this path is easily followed most of
the time. But one day the “why” arises and everything begins in
that weariness tinged with amazement. “Begins”—this is
important. Weariness comes at the end of the acts of a mechanical
life, but at the same time it inaugurates the impulse of
consciousness. It awakens consciousness and provokes what
follows. What follows is the gradual return into the chain or it is
the definitive awakening. At the end of the awakening comes, in
time, the consequence: suicide or recovery. In itself weariness has
something sickening about it. Here, I must conclude that it is good.
For everything be-gins with consciousness and nothing is worth
anything except through it. There is nothing original about these
remarks. But they are obvious; that is enough for a while, during a
sketchy reconnaissance in the origins of the absurd. Mere
“anxiety,” as Heidegger says, is at the source of everything.
Likewise and during every day of an unillustrious life, time
carries us. But a moment always comes when we have to carry it.
We live on the future: “tomorrow,” “later on,” “when you have
made your way,” “you will understand when you are old enough.”
Such irrelevan-cies are wonderful, for, after all, it’s a matter of
dying. Yet a day comes when a man notices or says that he is
thirty. Thus he asserts his youth. But simultaneously he situates
himself in relation to time. He takes his place in it. He admits that
he stands at a certain point on a curve that he acknowledges having
to travel to its end. He belongs to time, and by the horror that
seizes him, he recognizes his worst enemy. Tomorrow, he was
longing for tomorrow, whereas everything in him ought to reject it.
That revolt of the flesh is the absurd. 1 ^
A step lower and strangeness creeps in: perceiving that the
world is “dense,” sensing to what a degree a stone is foreign and
irreducible to us, with what intensity nature or a landscape can
negate us. At the heart of all beauty lies something inhuman, and
these hills, the softness of the sky, the outline of these trees at this
very minute lose the illusory meaning with which we had clothed
them, henceforth more remote than a lost paradise. The primitive
hostility of the world rises up to face us across millennia, for a
second we cease to understand it because for centuries we have
understood in it solely the images and designs that we had at¬
tributed to it beforehand, because henceforth we lack the power to
make use of that artifice. The world evades us because it becomes
itself again. That stage scenery masked by habit becomes again
what it is. It withdraws at a distance from us. Just as there are days
when under the familial face of a woman, we see as a stranger her
we had loved months or years ago, perhaps we shall come even to
desire what suddenly leaves us so alone. But the time has not yet
come. Just one thing: that denseness and that strangeness of the
world is the absurd.
Men, too, secrete the inhuman. At certain moments of lucidity,
the mechanical aspect of their gestures, their meaningless
pantomime makes silly everything that surrounds them. A man is
talking on the telephone behind a glass partition; you cannot hear
him, but you see his incomprehensible dumb show: you wonder
why he is alive. This discomfort in the face of man’s own
inhumanity, this incalculable tumble before the image of what we
are, this “nausea,” as a writer of today calls it, is also the absurd.
Likewise the stranger who at certain seconds comes to meet us in a
mirror, the familiar and yet alarming brother we encounter in our
own photographs is also the absurd.
I come at last to death and to the attitude we have toward it. On
this point everything has been said and it is only proper to avoid
pathos. Yet one will never be sufficiently surprised that everyone
lives as if no one “knew.” This is because in reality there is no
experience of death. Properly speaking, nothing has been
experienced but what has been lived and made conscious. Here, it
is barely possible to speak of the experience of others’ deaths. It is
a substitute, an illusion, and it never quite convinces us. That
melancholy convention cannot be persuasive. The horror comes in
reality from the mathematical aspect of the event. If time frightens
us, this is because it works out the problem and the solution comes
afterward. All the pretty speeches about the soul will have their
contrary convincingly proved, at least for a time. From this inert
body on which a slap makes no mark the soul has disappeared.
This elementary and definitive aspect of the adventure constitutes
the absurd feeling. Under the fatal lighting of that destiny, its
uselessness becomes evident. No code of ethics and no effort are
justifiable a priori in the face of the cruel mathematics that
command our condition.
Let me repeat: all this has been said over and over. I am
limiting myself here to making a rapid classification and to
pointing out these obvious themes. They run through all literatures
and all philosophies. Everyday conversation feeds on them. There
is no question of reinventing them. But it is essential to be sure of
these facts in order to be able to question oneself subsequently on
the primordial question. I am interested let me repeat again—not
go much in absurd discoveries as in their consequences. If one is
assured of these facts, what is one to conclude, how far is one to go
to elude nothing? Is one to die voluntarily or to hope in spite of
everything? Beforehand, it is necessary to take the same rapid
inventory on the plane of the intelligence.
The mind’s first step is to distinguish what is true from what is
false. However, as soon as thought reflects on itself, what it first
discovers is a contradiction. Useless to strive to be convincing in
this case. Over the centuries no one has furnished a clearer and
more elegant demonstration of the business than Aristotle: “The
often ridiculed consequence of these opinions is that they destroy
themselves. For by asserting that all is true we assert the truth of
the contrary assertion and consequently the falsity of our own
thesis (for the contrary assertion does not admit that it can be true).
And if one says that all is false, that assertion is itself false. If we
declare that solely the assertion opposed to ours is false or else that
solely ours is not false, we are nevertheless forced to admit an
infinite number of true or false judgments. For the one who
expresses a true assertion proclaims simultaneously that it is true,
and so on ad infinitum. ”
This vicious circle is but the first of a series in which the mind
that studies itself gets lost in a giddy whirling. The very simplicity
of these paradoxes makes them irreducible. Whatever may be the
plays on words and the acrobatics of logic, to understand is, above
all, to unify. The mind’s deepest desire, even in its most elaborate
operations, parallels man’s unconscious feeling in the face of his
universe: it is an insistence upon familiarity, an appetite for clarity.
Understanding the world for a man is reducing it to the human,
stamping it with his seal. The cat’s universe is not the universe of
the anthill. The truism “All thought is anthropomorphic” has no
other meaning. Likewise, the mind that aims to understand reality
can consider itself satisfied only by reducing it to terms of thought.
If man realized that the universe like him can love and suffer, he
would be reconciled. If thought discovered in the shimmering
mirrors of phenomena eternal relations capable of summing them
up and summing themselves up in a single principle, then would be
seen an intellectual joy of which the myth of the blessed would be
but a ridiculous imitation. That nostalgia for unity, that appetite for
the absolute illustrates the essential impulse of the human drama.
But the fact of that nostalgia’s existence does not imply that it is to
be immediately satisfied. For if, bridging the gulf that separates
desire from conquest, we assert with Parmenides the reality of the
One (whatever it may be), we fall into the ridiculous contradiction
of a mind that asserts total unity and proves by its very assertion its
own difference and the diversity it claimed to resolve. This other
vicious circle is enough to stifle our hopes.
These are again truisms. I shall again repeat that they are not
interesting in themselves but in the consequences that can be
deduced from them. I know another truism: it tells me that man is
mortal. One can nevertheless count the minds that have deduced
the extreme conclusions from it. It is essential to consider as a
constant point of reference in this essay the regular hiatus between
what we fancy we know and what we really know, practical assent
and simulated ignorance which allows us to live with ideas which,
if we truly put them to the test, ought to upset our whole life. Faced
with this inextricable contradiction of the mind, we shall fully
grasp the divorce separating us from our own creations. So long as
the mind keeps silent in the motionless world of its hopes,
everything is reflected and arranged in the unity of its nostalgia.
But with its first move this world cracks and tumbles: an infinite
number of shimmering fragments is offered to the understanding.
We must despair of ever reconstructing the familiar, calm surface
which would give us peace of heart. After so many centuries of
inquiries, so many abdications among thinkers, we are well aware
that this is true for all our knowledge. With the exception of
professional rationalists, today people despair of true knowledge. If
the only significant history of human thought were to be written, it
would have to be the history of its successive regrets and its
impotences.
Of whom and of what indeed can I say: “I know that!” This
heart within me I can feel, and I judge that it exists. This world I
can touch, and I likewise judge that it exists. There ends all my
knowledge, and the rest is construction. For if I try to seize this self
of which I feel sure, if I try to define and to summarize it, it is
nothing but water slipping through my fingers. I can sketch one by
one all the aspects it is able to assume, all those likewise that have
been attributed to it, this upbringing, this origin, this ardor or these
silences, this nobility or this vileness. But aspects cannot be added
up. This very heart which is mine will forever remain indefinable
to me. Between the certainty I have of my existence and the
content I try to give to that assurance, the gap will never be filled.
Forever I shall be a stranger to myself. In psychology as in logic,
there are truths but no truth. Socrates’”Know thyself’ has as much
value as the “Be virtuous” of our confessionals. They reveal a
nostalgia at the same time as an ignorance. They are sterile
exercises on great subjects. They are legitimate only in precisely so
far as they are approximate.
And here are trees and I know their gnarled surface, water and
I feel its taste. These scents of grass and stars at night, certain
evenings when the heart relaxes—how shall I negate this world
whose power and strength I feel? Yet all the knowledge on earth
will give me nothing to assure me that this world is mine. You
describe it to me and you teach me to classify it. You enumerate its
laws and in my thirst for knowledge I admit that they are true. You
take apart its mechanism and my hope increases. At the final stage
you teach me that this wondrous and multicolored universe can be
reduced to the atom and that the atom itself can be reduced to the
electron. All this is good and I wait for you to continue. But you
tell me of an invisible planetary system in which electrons
gravitate around a nucleus. You explain this world to me with an
image. I realize then that you have been reduced to poetry: I shall
never know. Have I the time to become indignant? You have
already changed theories. So that science that was to teach me
everything ends up in a hypothesis, that lucidity founders in
metaphor, that uncertainty is resolved in a work of art. What need
had I of so many efforts? The soft lines of these hills and the hand
of evening on this troubled heart teach me much more. I have
returned to my beginning. I realize that if through science I can
seize phenomena and enumerate them, I cannot, for all that,
apprehend the world. Were I to trace its entire relief with my
finger, I should not know any more. And you give me the choice
between a description that is sure but that teaches me nothing and
hypotheses that claim to teach me but that are not sure. A stranger
to myself and to the world, armed solely with a thought that
negates itself as soon as it asserts, what is this condition in which I
can have peace only by refusing to know and to live, in which the
appetite for conquest bumps into walls that defy its assaults? To
will is to stir up paradoxes. Everything is ordered in such a way as
to bring into being that poisoned peace produced by
thoughtlessness, lack of heart, or fatal renunciations.
Hence the intelligence, too, tells me in its way that this world is
absurd. Its contrary, blind reason, may well claim that all is clear; I
was waiting for proof and longing for it to be right. But despite so
many pretentious centuries and over the heads of so many eloquent
and persuasive men, I know that is false. On this plane, at least,
there is no happiness if I cannot know. That universal reason,
practical or ethical, that determinism, those categories that explain
everything are enough to make a decent man laugh. They have
nothing to do with the mind. They negate its profound truth, which
is to be enchained. In this unintelligible and limited universe,
man’s fate henceforth assumes its meaning. A horde of irrationals
has sprung up and surrounds him until his ultimate end. In his
recovered and now studied lucidity, the feeling of the absurd
becomes clear and definite. I said that the world is absurd, but I
was too hasty. This world in itself is not reasonable, that is all that
can be said. But what is absurd is the confrontation of this
irrational and the wild longing for clarity whose call echoes in the
human heart. The absurd depends as much on man as on the world.
For the moment it is all that links them together. It binds them one
to the other as only hatred can weld two creatures together. This is
all I can discern clearly in this measureless universe where my
adventure takes place. Let us pause here. If I hold to be true that
absurdity that determines my relationship with life, if I become
thoroughly imbued with that sentiment that seizes me in face of the
world’s scenes, with that lucidity imposed on me by the pursuit of
a science, I must sacrifice everything to these certainties and I must
see them squarely to be able to maintain them. Above all, I must
adapt my behavior to them and pursue them in all their
consequences. I am speaking here of decency. But I want to know
beforehand if thought can live in those deserts.
* * *
I already know that thought has at least entered those deserts.
There it found its bread. There it realized that it had previously
been feeding on phantoms. It justified some of the most urgent
themes of human reflection.
From the moment absurdity is recognized, it becomes a
passion, the most harrowing of all. But whether or not one can live
with one’s passions, whether or not one can accept their law,
which is to bum the heart they simultaneously exalt—that is the
whole question. It is not, however, the one we shall ask just yet. It
stands at the center of this experience. There will be time to come
back to it. Let us recognize rather those themes and those impulses
bom of the desert. It will suffice to enumerate them. They, too, are
kn own to all today. There have always been men to defend the
rights of the irrational. The tradition of what may be called
humiliated thought has never ceased to exist. The criticism of
rationalism has been made so often that it seems unnecessary to
begin again. Yet our epoch is marked by the rebirth of those
paradoxical systems that strive to trip up the reason as if truly it
had always forged ahead. But that is not so much a proof of the
efficacy of the reason as of the intensity of its hopes. On the plane
of history, such a constancy of two attitudes illustrates the essential
passion of man tom between his urge toward unity and the clear
vision he may have of the walls enclosing him.
But never perhaps at any time has the attack on reason been
more violent than in ours. Since Zarathustra’s great outburst: “By
chance it is the oldest nobility in the world. I conferred it upon all
things when I proclaimed that above them no eternal will was
exercised,” since Kierkegaard’s fatal illness, “that malady that
leads to death with nothing else following it,” the significant and
tormenting themes of absurd thought have followed one another.
Or at least, and this proviso is of capital importance, the themes of
irrational and religious thought. From Jaspers to Heidegger, from
Kierkegaard to Che-stov, from the phenomenologists to Scheler,
on the logical plane and on the moral plane, a whole family of
minds related by their nostalgia but opposed by their methods or
their aims, have persisted in blocking the royal road of reason and
in recovering the direct paths of truth. Here I assume these
thoughts to be known and lived. Whatever may be or have been
their ambitions, all started out from that indescribable universe
where contradiction, antinomy, anguish, or impotence reigns. And
what they have in common is precisely the themes so far disclosed.
For them, too, it must be said that what matters above all is the
conclusions they have managed to draw from those discoveries.
That matters so much that they must be examined separately. But
for the moment we are concerned solely with their discoveries and
their initial experiments. We are concerned solely with noting their
agreement. If it would be presumptuous to try to deal with their
philosophies, it is possible and sufficient in any case to bring out
the climate that is common to them.
Heidegger considers the human condition coldly and
announces that that existence is humiliated. The only reality is
“anxiety” in the whole chain of beings. To the man lost in the
world and its diversions this anxiety is a brief, fleeting fear. But if
that fear becomes conscious of itself, it becomes anguish, the
perpetual climate of the lucid man “in whom existence is
concentrated.” This professor of philosophy writes without
trembling and in the most abstract language in the world that “the
finite and limited character of human existence is more primordial
than man himself.” His interest in Kant extends only to
recognizing the restricted character of his “pure Reason.” This is to
coincide at the end of his analyses that “the world can no longer
offer anything to the man filled with anguish.” This anxiety seems
to him so much more important than all the categories in the world
that he thinks and talks only of it. He enumerates its aspects:
boredom when the ordinary man strives to quash it in him and
benumb it; terror when the mind contemplates death. He too does
not separate consciousness from the absurd. The consciousness of
death is the call of anxiety and “existence then delivers itself its
own summons through the intermediary of consciousness.” It is the
very voice of anguish and it adjures existence “to return from its
loss in the anonymous They.” For him, too, one must not sleep, but
must keep alert until the consummation. He stands in this absurd
world and points out its ephemeral character. He seeks his way
amid these ruins.
Jaspers despairs of any ontology because he claims that we
have lost “naivete.” He knows that we can achieve nothing that
will transcend the fatal game of appearances. He knows that the
end of the mind is failure. He tarries over the spiritual adventures
revealed by history and pitilessly discloses the flaw in each system,
the illusion that saved everything, the preaching that hid nothing.
In this ravaged world in which the impossibility of knowledge is
established, in which everlasting nothingness seems the only
reality and irremediable despair seems the only attitude, he tries to
recover the Ariadne’s thread that leads to divine secrets.
Chestov, for his part, throughout a wonderfully monotonous
work, constantly straining toward the same truths, tirelessly
demonstrates that the tightest system, the most universal
rationalism always stumbles eventually on the irrational of human
thought. None of the ironic facts or ridiculous contradictions that
depreciate the reason escapes him. One thing only interests him,
and that is the exception, whether in the domain of the heart or of
the mind. Through the Dostoevskian experiences of the
condemned man, the exacerbated adventures of the Nietzschean
mind, Hamlet’s imprecations, or the bitter aristocracy of an Ibsen,
he tracks down, il-luminates, and magnifies the human revolt
against the irremediable. He refuses the reason its reasons and
begins to advance with some decision only in the middle of that
colorless desert where all certainties have become stones.
Of all perhaps the most engaging, Kierkegaard, for a part of his
existence at least, does more than discover the absurd, he lives it.
The man who writes: “The surest of stubborn silences is not to
hold one’s tongue but to talk” makes sure in the beginning that no
truth is absolute or can render satisfactory an existence that is
impossible in itself. Don Juan of the understanding, he multiplies
pseudonyms and contradictions, writes his Discourses of
Edification at the same time as that manual of cynical spiritualism,
The Diary of the Seducer. He refuses consolations, ethics, reliable
principles. As for that thorn he feels in his heart, he is careful not
to quiet its pain. On the contrary, he awakens it and, in the
desperate joy of a man crucified and happy to be so, he builds up
piece by piece—lucidity, refusal, make believe—a category of the
man possessed. That face both tender and sneering, those
pirouettes followed by a cry from the heart are the absurd spirit
itself grappling with a reality beyond its comprehension. And the
spiritual adventure that leads Kierkegaard to his beloved scandals
begins likewise in the chaos of an experience divested of its setting
and relegated to its original incoherence.
On quite a different plane, that of method, Husserl and the
phenomenologists, by their very extravagances, reinstate the world
in its diversity and deny the transcendent power of the reason. The
spiritual universe becomes incalculably enriched through them.
The rose petal, the milestone, or the human hand are as important
as love, desire, or the laws of gravity. Thinking ceases to be
unifying or making a semblance familiar in the guise of a major
principle. Thinking is learning all over again to see, to be attentive,
to focus consciousness; it is turning every idea and every image, in
the manner of Proust, into a privileged moment. What justifies
thought is its extreme consciousness. Though more positive than
Kierkegaard’s or Chestov’s, Husserl’s manner of proceeding, in
the beginning, nevertheless negates the classic method of the
reason, disappoints hope, opens to intuition and to the heart a
whole proliferation of phenomena, the wealth of which has about it
something inhuman. These paths lead to all sciences or to none.
This amounts to saying that in this case the means are more
important than the end. All that is involved is “an attitude for
understanding” and not a consolation. Let me repeat: in the
beginning, at very least.
How can one fail to feel the basic relationship of these minds!
How can one fail to see that they take their stand around a
privileged and bitter moment in which hope has no further place? I
want everything to be explained to me or nothing. And the reason
is impotent when it hears this cry from the heart. The mind aroused
by this insistence seeks and finds nothing but contradictions and
nonsense. What I fail to understand is nonsense. The world is
peopled with such irrationals. The world itself, whose single
meaning I do not understand, is but a vast irrational. If one could
only say just once: “This is clear,” all would be saved. But these
men vie with one another in proclaiming that nothing is clear, all is
chaos, that all man has is his lucidity and his definite knowledge of
the walls surrounding him.
All these experiences agree and confirm one another. The
mind, when it reaches its limits, must make a judgment and choose
its conclusions. This is where suicide and the reply stand. But I
wish to reverse the order of the inquiry and start out from the
intelligent adventure and come back to daily acts. The experiences
called to mind here were born in the desert that we must not leave
behind. At least it is essential to know how far they went. At this
point of his effort man stands face to face with the irrational. He
feels within him his longing for happiness and for reason. The
absurd is born of this confrontation between the human need and
the unreasonable silence of the world. This must not be forgotten.
This must be clung to because the whole consequence of a life can
depend on it. The irrational, the human nostalgia, and the absurd
that is bom of their encounter—these are the three characters in the
drama that must necessarily end with all the logic of which an
existence is capable.
Philosophical Suicide
The feeling of the absurd is not, for all that, the notion of the
absurd. It lays the foundations for it, and that is all. It is not limited
to that notion, except in the brief moment when it passes judgment
on the universe. Subsequently it has a chance of going further. It is
alive; in other words, it must die or else reverberate. So it is with
the themes we have gathered together. But there again what
interests me is not works or minds, criticism of which would call
for another form and another place, but the discovery of what their
conclusions have in common. Never, perhaps, have minds been so
different. And yet we recognize as identical the spiritual
landscapes in which they get under way. Likewise, despite such
dissimilar zones of knowledge, the cry that terminates their
itinerary rings out in the same way. It is evident that the thinkers
we have just recalled have a common climate.
To say that that climate is deadly scarcely amounts to playing
on words. Living under that stifling sky forces one to get away or
to stay. The important thing is to find out how people get away in
the first case and why people stay in the second case. This is how I
define the problem of suicide and the possible interest in the
conclusions of existential philosophy.
But first I want to detour from the direct path. Up to now we
have managed to circumscribe the absurd from the outside. One
can, however, wonder how much is clear in that notion and by
direct analysis try to discover its meaning on the one hand and, on
the other, the consequences it involves.
If I accuse an innocent man of a monstrous crime, if I tell a
virtuous man that he has coveted his own sister, he will reply that
this is absurd. His indignation has its comical aspect. But it also
has its fundamental reason. The virtuous man illustrates by that
reply the definitive antinomy existing between the deed I am
attributing to him and his lifelong principles. “It’s absurd” means
“It’s impossible” but also “It’s contradictory.” If I see a man armed
only with a sword attack a group of machine guns, I shall consider
his act to be absurd. But it is so solely by virtue of the
disproportion between his intention and the reality he will
encounter, of the contradiction I notice between his true strength
and the aim he has in view. Likewise we shall deem a verdict
absurd when we contrast it with the verdict the facts apparently
dictated. And, similarly, a demonstration by the absurd is achieved
by comparing the consequences of such a reasoning with the
logical reality one wants to set up. In all these cases, from the
simplest to the most complex, the magnitude of the absurdity will
be in direct ratio to the distance between the two terms of my
comparison. There are absurd marriages, challenges, rancors,
silences, wars, and even peace treaties. For each of them the
absurdity springs from a comparison. I am thus justified in saying
that the feeling of absurdity does not spring from the mere scrutiny
of a fact or an impression, but that it bursts from the comparison
between a bare fact and a certain reality, between an action and the
world that transcends it. The absurd is essentially a divorce. It lies
in neither of the elements compared; it is born of their
confrontation.
In this particular case and on the plane of intelligence, I can
therefore say that the Absurd is not in man (if such a metaphor
could have a meaning) nor in the world, but in their presence
together. For the moment it is the only bond uniting them. If wish
to limit myself to facts, I know what man wants, I know what the
world offers him, and now I can say that I also know what li nk s
them. I have no need to dig deeper. A single certainty is enough for
the seeker. He simply has to derive all the consequences from it.
The immediate consequence is also a rule of method. The odd
trinity brought to light in this way is certainly not a startling
discovery. But it resembles the data of experience in that it is both
infinitely simple and infinitely complicated. Its first distinguishing
feature in this regard is that it cannot be divided. To destroy one of
its terms is to destroy the whole. There can be no absurd outside
the human mind. Thus, like everything else, the absurd ends with
death. But there can be no absurd outside this world either. And it
is by this elementary criterion that I judge the notion of the absurd
to be essential and consider that it can stand as the first of my
truths. The rule of method alluded to above appears here. If I judge
that a thing is true, I must preserve it. If I attempt to solve a
problem, at least I must not by that very solution conjure away one
of the terms of the problem. For me the sole datum is the absurd.
The first and, after all, the only condition of my inquiry is to
preserve the very thing that crushes me, consequently to respect
what I consider essential in it. I have just defined it as a
confrontation and an unceasing struggle.
And carrying this absurd logic to its conclusion, I must admit
that that struggle implies a total absence of hope (which has
nothing to do with despair), a continual rejection (which must not
be confused with renunciation), and a conscious dissatisfaction
(which must not be compared to immature unrest). Everything that
destroys, conjures away, or exorcises these requirements (and, to
begin with, consent which overthrows divorce) ruins the absurd
and devaluates the attitude that may then be proposed. The absurd
has meaning only in so far as it is not agreed to.
There exists an obvious fact that seems utterly moral: namely,
that a man is always a prey to his truths. Once he has admitted
them, he cannot free himself from them. One has to pay something.
A man who has be-come conscious of the absurd is forever bound
to it. A man devoid of hope and conscious of being so has ceased
to belong to the future. That is natural. But it is just as natural that
he should strive to escape the universe of which he is the creator.
All the foregoing has significance only on account of this paradox.
Certain men, starting from a critique of rationalism, have admitted
the absurd climate. Nothing is more instructive in this regard than
to scrutinize the way in which they have elaborated their
consequences.
Now, to limit myself to existential philosophies, I see that all of
them without exception suggest escape. Through an odd reasoning,
starting out from the absurd over the ruins of reason, in a closed
universe limited to the human, they deify what crushes them and
find reason to hope in what impoverishes them. That forced hope is
religious in all of them. It deserves attention.
I shall merely analyze here as examples a few themes dear to
Chestov and Kierkegaard. But Jaspers will provide us, in
caricatural form, a typical example of this attitude. As a result the
rest will be clearer. He is left powerless to realize the transcendent,
incapab le of plumbing the depth of experience, and conscious of
that universe upset by failure. Will he advance or at least draw the
conclusions from that failure? He contributes nothing new. He has
found nothing in experience but the confession of his own
impotence and no occasion to infer any satisfactory principle. Yet
without justification, as he says to himself, he suddenly asserts all
at once the transcendent, the essence of experience, and the
superhuman significance of life when he writes: “Does not the
failure reveal, beyond any possible explanation and interpretation,
not the absence but the existence of transcendence?” That
existence which, suddenly and through a blind act of human
confidence, explains everything, he defines as “the unthinkable
unity of the general and the particular.” Thus the absurd becomes
god (in the broadest meaning of this word) and that inability to
understand becomes the existence that illuminates everything.
Nothing logically prepares this reasoning. I can call it a leap. And
para-doxically can be understood Jaspers’s insistence, his infinite
patience devoted to making the experience of the transcendent
impossible to realize. For the more fleeting that approximation is,
the more empty that definition proves to be, and the more real that
transcendent is to him; for the passion he devotes to asserting it is
in direct proportion to the gap between his powers of explanation
and the irrationality of the world and of experience. It thus appears
that the more bitterly Jaspers destroys the reason’s preconceptions,
the more radically he will explain the world. That apostle of
humiliated thought will find at the very end of humiliation the
means of regenerating being to its very depth.
Mystical thought has familiarized us with such devices. They
are just as legitimate as any attitude of mind. But for the moment I
am acting as if I took a certain problem seriously. Without judging
beforehand the general value of this attitude or its educative power,
I mean simply to consider whether it answers the conditions I set
myself, whether it is worthy of the conflict that concerns me. Thus
I return to Chestov. A commentator relates a remark of his that
deserves interest:
“The only true solution,” he said, “is precisely where human
judgment sees no solution. Otherwise, what need would we have of
God? We turn toward God only to obtain the impossible. As for
the possible, men suffice.” If there is a Chestovian philosophy, I
can say that it is altogether summed up in this way. For when, at
the conclusion of his passionate analyses, Chestov discovers the
fundamental absurdity of all existence, he does not say: “This is
the absurd,” but rather: “This is God: we must rely on him even if
he does not correspond to any of our rational categories.” So that
confusion may not be possible, the Russian philosopher even hints
that this God is perhaps full of hatred and hateful,
incomprehensible and contradictory; but the more hideous is his
face, the more he asserts his power. His greatness is his
incoherence. His proof is his inhumanity. One must spring into him
and by this leap free oneself from rational illusions. Thus, for
Chestov acceptance of the absurd is contemporaneous with the
absurd itself. Being aware of it amounts to accepting it, and the
whole logical effort of his thought is to bring it out so that at the
same time the tremendous hope it involves may burst forth. Let me
repeat that this attitude is legitimate. But I am persisting here in
considering a single problem and all its consequences. I do not
have to examine the emotion of a thought or of an act of faith. I
have a whole lifetime to do that. I know that the rationalist finds
Chestov’s attitude annoying. But I also feel that Chestov is right
rather than the rationalist, and I merely want to know if he remains
faithful to the commandments of the absurd.
Now, if it is admitted that the absurd is the contrary of hope, it
is seen that existential thought for Chestov presupposes the absurd
but proves it only to dispel it. Such subtlety of thought is a
conjuror’s emotional trick. When Chestov elsewhere sets his
absurd in opposition to current morality and reason, he calls it truth
and redemption. Hence, there is basically in that definition of the
absurd an approbation that Chestov grants it. If it is admitted that
all the power of that notion lies in the way it runs counter to our
elementary hopes, if it is felt that to remain, the absurd requires not
to be consented to, then it can be clearly seen that it has lost its true
aspect, its human and relative character in order to enter an eternity
that is both incomprehensible and satisfying. If there is an absurd,
it is in man’s universe. The moment the notion transforms itself
into eternity’s springboard, it ceases to be linked to human lucidity.
The absurd is no longer that evidence that man ascertains without
consenting to it. The struggle is eluded. Man integrates the absurd
and in that communion causes to disappear its essential character,
which is opposition, laceration, and divorce. This leap is an escape.
Chestov, who is so fond of quoting Hamlet’s remark: “The time is
out of joint,” writes it down with a sort of savage hope that seems
to belong to him in particular. For it is not in this sense that Hamlet
says it or Shakespeare writes it. The intoxication of the irrational
and the vocation of rapture turn a lucid mind away from the
absurd. To Chestov reason is useless but there is something beyond
reason. To an absurd mind reason is useless and there is nothing
beyond reason.
This leap can at least enlighten us a little more as to the true
nature of the absurd. We know that it is worthless except in an
equilibrium, that it is, above all, in the comparison and not in the
terms of that comparison. But it so happens that Chestov puts all
the emphasis on one of the terms and destroys the equilibrium. Our
appetite for understanding, our nostalgia for the absolute are
explicable only in so far, precisely, as we can understand and
explain many things. It is useless to negate the reason absolutely. It
has its order in which it is efficacious. It is properly that of human
experience. Whence we wanted to make everything clear. If we
cannot do so, if the absurd is born on that occasion, it is born
precisely at the very meeting-point of that efficacious but limited
reason with the ever resurgent irrational. Now, when Chestov rises
up against a Hegelian proposition such as “the motion of the solar
system takes place in conformity with immutable laws and those
laws are its reason,” when he devotes all his passion to upsetting
Spinoza’s rationalism, he concludes, in effect, in favor of the
vanity of all reason. Whence, by a natural and illegitimate reversal,
to the pre-eminence of the irrational.^ But the transition is not
evident. For here may intervene the notion of limit and the notion
of level. The laws of nature may be operative up to a certain limit,
beyond which they turn against themselves to give birth to the
absurd. Or else, they may justify themselves on the level of
description without for that reason being true on the level of
explanation.
Everything is sacrificed here to the irrational, and, the demand
for clarity being conjured away, the absurd disappears with one of
the terms of its comparison. The absurd man, on the other hand,
does not undertake such a leveling process. He recognizes the
struggle, does not absolutely scorn reason, and admits the
irrational. Thus he again embraces in a single glance all the data of
experience and he is little inclined to leap before knowing. He
knows simply that in that alert awareness there is no further place
for hope.
What is perceptible in Leo Chestov will be perhaps even more
so in Kierkegaard. To be sure, it is hard to outline clear
propositions in so elusive a writer. But, despite apparently opposed
writings, beyond the pseudonyms, the tricks, and the smiles, can be
felt throughout that work, as it were, the presentiment (at the same
time as the apprehension) of a truth which eventually bursts forth
in the last works: Kierkegaard likewise takes the leap. His
childhood having been so frightened by Christianity, he ultimately
returns to its harshest aspect. For him, too, antinomy and paradox
become criteria of the religious. Thus, the very thing that led to
despair of the meaning and depth of this life now gives it its truth
and its clarity. Christianity is the scandal, and what Kierkegaard
calls for quite plainly is the third sacrifice required by Ignatius
Loyola, the one in which God most rejoices: “The sacrifice of the
intellect.” ^
This effect of the “leap” is odd, but must not surprise us any
longer. He makes of the absurd the criterion of the other world,
whereas it is simply a residue of the experience of this world. “In
his failure,” says Kierkegaard, “the believer finds his triumph.”
It is not for me to wonder to what stirring preaching this
attitude is linked. I merely have to wonder if the spectacle of the
absurd and its own character justifies it. On this point, I kn ow that
it is not so. Upon considering again the content of the absurd, one
understands better the method that inspired Kierkegaard. Between
the irrational of the world and the insurgent nostalgia of the absurd,
he does not maintain the equilibrium. He does not respect the
relationship that constitutes, properly speaking, the feeling of
absurdity. Sure of being unable to escape the irrational, he wants at
least to save himself from that desperate nostalgia that seems to
him sterile and devoid of implication. But if he may be right on
this point in his judgment, he could not be in his negation. If he
substitutes for his cry of revolt a frantic adherence, at once he is
led to blind himself to the absurd which hitherto enlightened him
and to deify the only certainty he henceforth possesses, the
irrational. The important thing, as Abbe Galiani said to Mine
d’Epinay, is not to be cured, but to live with one’s ailments.
Kierkegaard wants to be cured. To be cured is his frenzied wish,
and it runs throughout his whole journal. The entire effort of his
intelligence is to escape the antinomy of the human condition. An
all the more desperate effort since he intermittently perceives its
vanity when he speaks of himself, as if neither fear of God nor
piety were capable of bringing him to peace. Thus it is that,
through a strained subterfuge, he gives the irrational the
appearance and God the attributes of the absurd: unjust,
incoherent, and incomprehensible. Intelligence alone in him strives
to stifle the underlying demands of the human heart. Since nothing
is proved, everything can be proved.
Indeed, Kierkegaard himself shows us the path taken. I do not
want to suggest anything here, but how can one fail to read in his
works the signs of an almost intentional mutilation of the soul to
balance the mutilation accepted in regard to the absurd? It is the
leitmotiv of the Journal. “What I lacked was the animal which also
belongs to human destiny .... But give me a body then.” And
further on: “Oh! especially in my early youth what should I not
have given to be a man, even for six months ... what I lack,
basically, is a body and the physical conditions of existence.”
Elsewhere, the same man nevertheless adopts the great cry of hope
that has come down through so many centuries and quickened so
many hearts, except that of the absurd man. “But for the Christian
death is certainly not the end of everything and it implies infinitely
more hope than life implies for us, even when that life is
overflowing with health and vigor.” Reconciliation through
scandal is still reconciliation. It allows one perhaps, as can be seen,
to derive hope of its contrary, which is death. But even if fellow-
feeling inclines one toward that attitude, still it must be said that
excess justifies nothing. That transcends, as the saying goes, the
human scale; therefore it must be superhuman. But this “therefore”
is superfluous. There is no logical certainty here. There is no
experimental probability either. All I can say is that, in fact, that
transcends my scale. If I do not draw a negation from it, at least I
do not want to found anything on the incomprehensible. I want to
know whether I can live with what I know and with that alone. I
am told again that here the intelligence must sacrifice its pride and
the reason bow down. But if I recognize the limits of the reason, I
do not therefore negate it, recognizing its relative powers. I merely
want to remain in this middle path where the intelligence can
remain clear. If that is its pride, I see no sufficient reason for
giving it up. Nothing more profound, for example, than
Kierkegaard’s view according to which despair is not a fact but a
state: the very state of sin. For sin is what alienates from God. The
absurd, which is the metaphysical state of the conscious man, does
not lead to God. m Perhaps this notion will become clearer if I risk
this shocking statement: the absurd is sin without God.
It is a matter of living in that state of the absurd I kn ow on
what it is founded, this mind and this world straining against each
other without being able to embrace each other. I ask for the rule—
of life of that state, and what I am offered neglects its basis,
negates one of the terms of the painful opposition, demands of me
a resignation. I ask what is involved in the condition I recognize as
mine; I kn ow it implies obscurity and ignorance; and I am assured
that this ignorance explains everything and that this darkness is my
light. But there is no reply here to my intent, and this stirring
lyricism cannot hide the paradox from me. One must therefore turn
away. Kierkegaard may shout in warning: “If man had no eternal
consciousness, if, at the bottom of everything, there were merely a
wild, seething force producing everything, both large and trifling,
in the storm of dark passions, if the bottomless void that nothing
can fill underlay all things, what would life be but despair?” This
cry is not likely to stop the absurd man. Seeking what is true is not
seeking what is desirable. If in order to elude the anxious question:
“What would life be?” one must, like the donkey, feed on the roses
of illusion, then the absurd mind, rather than resigning itself to
falsehood, prefers, to adopt fearlessly Kierkegaard’s reply:
“despair.” Everything considered, a determined soul will always
manage.
***
I am taking the liberty at this point of calling the existential
attitude philosophical suicide. But this does not imply a judgment.
It is a convenient way of indicating the movement by which a
thought negates itself and tends to transcend itself in its very
negation. For the existentials negation is their God. To be precise,
that god is maintained only through the negation of human
reason. 1 ^ But, like suicides, gods change with men. There are
many ways of leaping, the essential being to leap. Those
redeeming negations, those ultimate contradictions which negate
the obstacle that has not yet been leaped over, may spring just as
well (this is the paradox at which this reasoning aims) from a
certain religious inspiration as from the rational order. They always
lay claim to the eternal, and it is solely in this that they take the
leap.
It must be repeated that the reasoning developed in this essay
leaves out altogether the most widespread spiritual attitude of our
enlightened age: the one, based on the principle that all is reason,
which aims to explain the world. It is natural to give a clear view
of the world after accepting the idea that it must be clear. That is
even legitimate, but does not concern the reasoning we are
following out here. In fact, our aim is to shed light upon the step
taken by the mind when, starting from a philosophy of the world’s
lack of meaning, it ends up by finding a meaning and depth in it.
The most touching of those steps is religious in essence; it
becomes obvious in the theme of the irrational. But the most
paradoxical and most significant is certainly the one that attributes
rational reasons to a world it originally imagined as devoid of any
guiding principle. It is impossible in any case to reach the
consequences that concern us without having given an idea of this
new attainment of the spirit of nostalgia.
I shall examine merely the theme of “the Intention” made
fashionable by Husserl and the phenomenologists. I have already
alluded to it. Originally Husserl’s method negates the classic
procedure of the reason. Let me repeat. Thinking is not unifying or
making the appearance familiar under the guise of a great
principle. Thinking is learning all over again how to see, directing
one’s consciousness, making of every image a privileged place. In
other words, phenomenology declines to explain the world, it
wants to be merely a description of actual experience. It confirms
absurd thought in its initial assertion that there is no truth, but
merely truths. From the evening breeze to this hand on my
shoulder, everything has its truth. Consciousness illuminates it by
paying attention to it. Consciousness does not form the object of its
understanding, it merely focuses, it is the act of attention, and, to
borrow a Bergsonian image, it resembles the projector that
suddenly focuses on an image. The difference is that there is no
scenario, but a successive and incoherent illustration. In that magic
lantern all the pictures are privileged. Consciousness suspends in
experience the objects of its attention. Through its miracle it
isolates them. Henceforth they are beyond all judgments. This is
the “intention” that characterizes consciousness. But the word does
not imply any idea of finality; it is taken in its sense of “direction”:
its only value is topographical.
At first sight, it certainly seems that in this way nothing
contradicts the absurd spirit. That apparent modesty of thought that
limits itself to describing what it declines to explain, that
intentional discipline whence results paradoxically a profound
enrichment of experience and the rebirth of the world in its
prolixity are absurd procedures. At least at first sight. For methods
of thought, in this case as elsewhere, always assume two aspects,
one psychological and the other metaphysical.^ Thereby they
harbor two truths. If the theme of the intentional claims to illustrate
merely a psychological attitude, by which reality is drained instead
of being explained, nothing in fact separates it from the absurd
spirit. It aims to enumerate what it cannot transcend. It affirms
solely that without any unifying principle thought can still take
delight in describing and understanding every aspect of experience.
The truth involved then for each of those aspects is psychological
in nature. It simply testifies to the “interest” that reality can offer.
It is a way of awaking a sleeping world and of making it vivid to
the mind. But if one attempts to extend and give a rational basis to
that notion of truth, if one claims to discover in this way the
“essence” of each object of knowledge, one restores its depth to
experience. For an absurd mind that is incomprehensible. Now, it
is this wavering between modesty and assurance that is noticeable
in the intentional attitude, and this shimmering of
phenomenological thought will illustrate the absurd reasoning
better than anything else.
For Husserl speaks likewise of “extra-temporal essences”
brought to light by the intention, and he sounds like Plato. All
things are not explained by one thing but by all things. I see no
difference. To be sure, those ideas or those essences that
consciousness “effectuates” at the end of every description are not
yet to be considered perfect models. But it is asserted that they are
directly present in each datum of perception. There is no longer a
single idea explaining everything, but an infinite number of
essences giving a meaning to an infinite number of objects. The
world comes to a stop, but also lights up. Platonic realism becomes
intuitive, but it is still realism. Kierkegaard was swallowed up in
his God; Parmenides plunged thought into the One. But here
thought hurls itself into an abstract polytheism. But this is not all:
hallucinations and fictions likewise belong to “extra-temporal
essences.” In the new world of ideas, the species of centaurs
collaborates with the more modest species of metropolitan man.
For the absurd man, there was a truth as well as a bitterness in
that purely psychological opinion that all aspects of the world are
privileged. To say that everything is privileged is tantamount to
saying that everything is equivalent. But the metaphysical aspect of
that truth is so far-reaching that through an elementary reaction he
feels closer perhaps to Plato. He is taught, in fact, that every image
presupposes an equally privileged essence. In this ideal world
without hierarchy, the formal army is composed solely of generals.
To be sure, transcendency had been eliminated. But a sudden shift
in thought brings back into the world a sort of fragmentary
immanence which restores to the universe its depth.
Am I to fear having carried too far a theme handled with
greater circumspection by its creators? I read merely these
assertions of Husserl, apparently paradoxical yet rigorously logical
if what precedes is accepted: “That which is true is true absolutely,
in itself; truth is one, identical with itself, however different the
creatures who perceive it, men, monsters, angels or gods.” Reason
triumphs and trumpets forth with that voice, I cannot deny. What
can its assertions mean in the absurd world? The perception of an
angel or a god has no meaning for me. That geometrical spot
where divine reason ratifies mine will always be incomprehensible
to me. There, too, I discern a leap, and though performed in the
abstract, it nonetheless means for me forgetting just what I do not
want to forget. When farther on Husserl exclaims: “If all masses
subject to attraction were to disappear, the law of attraction would
not be destroyed but would simply remain without any possible
application,” I know that I am faced with a metaphysic of
consolation. And if I want to discover the point where thought
leaves the path of evidence, I have only to reread the parallel
reasoning that Husserl voices regarding the mind: “If we could
contemplate clearly the exact laws of psychic processes, they
would be seen to be likewise eternal and invariable, like the basic
laws of theoretical natural science. Hence they would be valid even
if there were no psychic process.” Even if the mind were not, its
laws would be! I see then that of a psychological truth Husserl
aims to make a rational rule: after having denied the integrating
power of human reason, he leaps by this expedient to eternal
Reason.
Husserl’s theme of the “concrete universe” cannot then surprise
me. If I am told that all essences are not formal but that some are
material, that the first are the object of logic and the second of
science, this is merely a question of definition. The abstract, I am
told, indicates but a part, without consistency in itself, of a
concrete universal. But the wavering already noted allows me to
throw light on the confusion of these terms. For that may mean that
the concrete object of my attention, this sky, the reflection of that
water on this coat, alone preserve the prestige of the real that my
interest isolates in the world. And I shall not deny it. But that may
mean also that this coat itself is universal, has its particular and
sufficient essence, belongs to the world of forms. 1 then realize that
merely the order of the procession has been changed. This world
has ceased to have its reflection in a higher universe, but the
heaven of forms is figured in the host of images of this earth. This
changes nothing for me. Rather than encountering here a taste for
the concrete, the meaning of the human condition, I find an
intellectualism sufficiently unbridled to generalize the concrete
itself.
It is futile to be amazed by the apparent paradox that leads
thought to its own negation by the opposite paths of humiliated
reason and triumphal reason. From the abstract god of Husserl to
the dazzling god of Kierkegaard the distance is not so great.
Reason and the irrational lead to the same preaching. In truth the
way matters but little; the will to arrive suffices. The abstract
philosopher and the religious philosopher start out from the same
disorder and support each other in the same anxiety. But the
essential is to explain. Nostalgia is stronger here than knowledge.
It is significant that the thought of the epoch is at once one of the
most deeply imbued with a philosophy of the non-significance of
the world and one of the most divided in its conclusions. It is
constantly oscillating between extreme rationalization of reality
which tends to break up that thought into standard reasons and its
extreme irrationalization which tends to deify it. But this divorce is
only apparent. It is a matter of reconciliation, and, in both cases,
the leap suffices. It is always wrongly thought that the notion of
reason is a oneway notion. To tell the truth, however rigorous it
may be in its ambition, this concept is nonetheless just as unstable
as others. Reason bears a quite human aspect, but it also is able to
turn toward the divine. Since Plotinus, who was the first to
reconcile it with the eternal climate, it has learned to turn away
from the most cherished of its principles, which is contradiction, in
order to integrate into it the strangest, the quite magic one of
participation. 1 ^ 1 It is an instrument of thought and not thought
itself. Above all, a man’s thought is his nostalgia.
Just as reason was able to soothe the melancholy of Plotinus, it
provides modern anguish the means of calming itself in the
familiar setting of the eternal. The absurd mind has less luck. For it
the world is neither so rational nor so irrational. It is unreasonable
and only that. With Husserl the reason eventually has no limits at
all. The absurd, on the contrary, establishes its lim-its since it is
powerless to calm its anguish. Kierkegaard independently asserts
that a single limit is enough to negate that anguish. But the absurd
does not go so far. For it that limit is directed solely at the reason’s
ambitions. The theme of the irrational, as it is conceived by the
existentials, is reason becoming confused and escaping by negating
itself. The absurd is lucid reason noting its limits.
Only at the end of this difficult path does the absurd man
recognize his true motives. Upon comparing his inner exigence and
what is then offered him, he suddenly feels he is going to turn
away. In the universe of Husserl the world becomes clear and that
longing for familiarity that man’s heart harbors becomes useless.
In Kierkegaard’s apocalypse that desire for clarity must be given
up if it wants to be satisfied. Sin is not so much knowing (if it
were, everybody would be innocent) as wanting to know. Indeed, it
is the only sin of which the absurd man can feel that it constitutes
both his guilt and his innocence. He is offered a solution in which
all the past contradictions have become merely polemical games.
But this is not the way he experienced them. Their truth must be
preserved, which consists in not being satisfied. He does not want
preaching.
My reasoning wants to be faithful to the evidence that aroused
it. That evidence is the absurd. It is that divorce between the mind
that desires and the world that disappoints, my nostalgia for unity,
this fragmented universe and the contradiction that binds them
together. Kierkegaard suppresses my nostalgia and Husserl gathers
together that universe. That is not what I was expecting. It was a
matter of living and thinking with those dislocations, of knowing
whether one had to accept or refuse. There can be no question of
masking the evidence, of suppressing the absurd by denying one of
the terms of its equation. It is essential to know whether one can
live with it or whether, on the other hand, logic commands one to
die of it. I am not interested in philosophical suicide, but rather in
plain suicide. I merely wish to purge it of its emotional content and
know its logic and its integrity. Any other position implies for the
absurd mind deceit and the mind’s retreat before what the mind
itself has brought to light. Husserl claims to obey the desire to
escape “the inveterate habit of living and thinking in certain well-
known and convenient conditions of existence,” but the final leap
restores in him the eternal and its comfort. The leap does not
represent an extreme danger as Kierkegaard would like it to do.
The danger, on the contrary, lies in the subtle instant that precedes
the leap. Being able to remain on that dizzying crest—that is
integrity and the rest is subterfuge. I know also that never has
helplessness inspired such striking harmonies as those of
Kierkegaard. But if helplessness has its place in the indifferent
landscapes of history, it has none in a reasoning whose exigence is
now known.
Absurd Freedom
Now the main thing is done, I hold certain facts from which I
cannot separate. What I know, what is certain, what I cannot deny,
what I cannot reject—this is what counts. I can negate everything
of that part of me that lives on vague nostalgias, except this desire
for unity, this longing to solve, this need for clarity and cohesion. I
can refute everything in this world surrounding me that offends or
enraptures me, except this chaos, this sovereign chance and this
divine equivalence which springs from anarchy. I don’t know
whether this world has a meaning that transcends it. But I know
that I do not know that meaning and that it is impossible for me
just now to know it. What can a meaning outside my condition
mean to me? I can understand only in human terms. What I touch,
what resists me—that is what I understand. And these two
certainties—my appetite for the absolute and for unity and the
impossibility of reducing this world to a rational and reasonable
principle—I also know that I cannot reconcile them. What other
truth can I admit without lying, without bringing in a hope I lack
and which means nothing within the limits of my condition?
If I were a tree among trees, a cat among animals, this life
would have a meaning, or rather this problem would not arise, for I
should belong to this world. I should be this world to which I am
now opposed by my whole consciousness and my whole insistence
upon familiarity. This ridiculous reason is what sets me in
opposition to all creation. I cannot cross it out with a stroke of the
pen. What I believe to be true I must therefore preserve. What
seems to me so obvious, even against me, I must support. And
what constitutes the basis of that conflict, of that break between the
world and my mind, but the awareness of it? If therefore I want to
preserve it, I can through a constant awareness, ever revived, ever
alert. This is what, for the moment, I must remember. At this
moment the absurd, so obvious and yet so hard to win, returns to a
man’s life and finds its home there. At this moment, too, the mind
can leave the arid, dried-up path of lucid effort. That path now
emerges in daily life. It encounters the world of the anonymous
impersonal pronoun “one,” but henceforth man enters in with his
revolt and his lucidity. He has forgotten how to hope. This hell of
the present is his Kingdom at last. All problems recover their sharp
edge. Abstract evidence retreats before the poetry of forms and
colors. Spiritual conflicts become embodied and return to the
abject and magnificent shelter of man’s heart. None of them is
settled. But all are transfigured. Is one going to die, escape by the
leap, rebuild a mansion of ideas and forms to one’s own scale? Is
one, on the contrary, going to take up the heart-rending and
marvelous wager of the absurd? Let’s make a final effort in this
regard and draw all our conclusions. The body, affection, creation,
action, human nobility will then resume their places in this mad
world. At last man will again find there the wine of the absurd and
the bread of indifference on which he feeds his greatness.
Let us insist again on the method: it is a matter of persisting. At
a certain point on his path the absurd man is tempted. History is
not lacking in either religions or prophets, even without gods. He is
asked to leap. All he can reply is that he doesn’t fully understand,
that it is not obvious. Indeed, he does not want to do anything but
what he fully understands. He is assured that this is the sin of
pride, but he does not understand the notion of sin; that perhaps
hell is in store, but he has not enough imagination to visualize that
strange future; that he is losing immortal life, but that seems to him
an idle consideration. An attempt is made to get him to admit his
guilt. He feels innocent. To tell the truth, that is all he feels—his
irreparable innocence. This is what allows him everything. Hence,
what he demands of himself is to live solely with what he knows,
to accommodate himself to what is, and to bring in nothing that is
not certain. He is told that nothing is. But this at least is a certainty.
And it is with this that he is concerned: he wants to find out if it is
possible to live without appeal.
Now I can broach the notion of suicide. It has already been felt
what solution might be given. At this point the problem is
reversed. It was previously a question of finding out whether or not
life had to have a meaning to be lived. It now becomes clear, on
the contrary, that it will be lived all the better if it has no meaning.
Living an experience, a particular fate, is accepting it fully. Now,
no one will live this fate, knowing it to be absurd, unless he does
everything to keep before him that absurd brought to light by
consciousness. Negating one of the terms of the opposition on
which he lives amounts to escaping it. To abolish conscious revolt
is to elude the problem. The theme of permanent revolution is thus
carried into individual experience. Living is keeping the absurd
alive. Keeping it alive is, above all, contemplating it. Unlike
Eurydice, the absurd dies only when we turn away from it. One of
the only coherent philosophical positions is thus revolt. It is a
constant confrontation between man and his own obscurity. It is an
insistence upon an impossible transparency. It challenges the world
anew every second. Just as danger provided man the unique
opportunity of seizing awareness, so metaphysical revolt extends
awareness to the whole of experience. It is that constant presence
of man in his own eyes. It is not aspiration, for it is devoid of hope.
That revolt is the certainly of a crushing fate, without the
resignation that ought to accompany it.
This is where it is seen to what a degree absurd experience is
remote from suicide. It may be thought that suicide follows
revolt—but wrongly. For it does not represent the logical outcome
of revolt. It is just the contrary by the consent it presupposes.
Suicide, like the leap, is acceptance at its extreme. Everything is
over and man returns to his essential history. His future, his unique
and dreadful future—he sees and rushes toward it. In its way,
suicide settles the absurd. It engulfs the absurd in the same death.
But I know that in order to keep alive, the absurd cannot be settled.
It escapes suicide to the extent that it is simultaneously awareness
and rejection of death. It is, at the extreme limit of the condemned
man’s last thought, that shoelace that despite everything he sees a
few yards away, on the very brink of his dizzying fall. The
contrary of suicide, in fact, is the man condemned to death.
That revolt gives life its value. Spread out over the whole
length of a life, it restores its majesty to that life. To a man devoid
of blinders, there is no finer sight than that of the intelligence at
grips with a reality that transcends it. The sight of human pride is
unequaled. No disparagement is of any use. That discipline that the
mind imposes on itself, that will conjured up out of nothing, that
face-to-face struggle have something exceptional about them. To
impoverish that reality whose inhumanity constitutes man’s
majesty is tantamount to impoverishing him himself. I understand
then why the doctrines that explain everything to me also debilitate
me at the same time. They relieve me of the weight of my own life,
and yet I must carry it alone. At this juncture, I cannot conceive
that a skeptical metaphysics can be joined to an ethics of
renunciation.
Consciousness and revolt, these rejections are the contrary of
renunciation. Everything that is indomitable and passionate in a
human heart quickens them, on the contrary, with its own life. It is
essential to die unrecon-ciled and not of one’s own free will.
Suicide is a repudi—ation. The absurd man can only drain
everything to the bitter end, and deplete himself. The absurd is his
extreme tension, which he maintains constantly by solitary effort,
for he knows that in that consciousness and in that day-to-day
revolt he gives proof of his only truth, which is defiance. This is a
first consequence.
If I remain in that prearranged position which consists in
drawing all the conclusions (and nothing else) involved in a newly
discovered notion, I am faced with a second paradox. In order to
remain faithful to that method, I have nothing to do with the
problem of metaphysical liberty. Knowing whether or not man is
free doesn’t interest me. I can experience only my own freedom.
As to it, I can have no general notions, but merely a few clear
insights. The problem of “freedom as such” has no meaning, for it
is linked in quite a different way with the problem of God.
Knowing whether or not man is free involves knowing whether he
can have a master. The absurdity peculiar to this problem comes
from the fact that the very notion that makes the problem of
freedom possible also takes away all its meaning. For in the
presence of God there is less a problem of freedom than a problem
of evil. You know the alternative: either we are not free and God
the all-powerful is responsible for evil. Or we are free and
responsible but God is not all powerful. All the scholastic
subtleties have neither added anything to nor subtracted anything
from the acuteness of this paradox.
This is why I cannot act lost in the glorification or the mere
definition of a notion which eludes me and loses its meaning as
soon as it goes beyond the frame of reference of my individual
experience. I cannot understand what kind of freedom would be
given me by a higher being. I have lost the sense of hierarchy. The
only conception of freedom I can have is that of the prisoner or the
individual in the midst of the State. The only one I know is
freedom of thought and action. Now if the absurd cancels all my
chances of eternal freedom, it restores and magnifies, on the other
hand, my freedom of action. That privation of hope and future
means an increase in man’s availability.
Before encountering the absurd, the everyday man lives with
aims, a concern for the future or for justification (with regard to
whom or what is not the question). He weighs his chances, he
counts on “someday,” his retirement or the labor of his sons. He
still thinks that something in his life can be directed. In truth, he
acts as if he were free, even if all the facts make a point of
contradicting that liberty. But after the absurd, everything is upset.
That idea that “I am,” my way of acting as if everything has a
meaning (even if, on occasion, I said that nothing has)—all that is
given the he in vertiginous fashion by the absurdity of a possible
death. Thinking of the future, establishing aims for oneself, having
preferences—all this presupposes a belief in freedom, even if one
occasionally ascertains that one doesn’t feel it. But at that moment
I am well aware that that higher liberty, that freedom to be, which
alone can serve as basis for a truth, does not exist. Death is there as
the only reality. After death the chips are down. I am not even free,
either, to perpetuate myself, but a slave, and, above all, a slave
without hope of an eternal revolution, without recourse to
contempt. And who without revolution and without contempt can
remain a slave? What freedom can exist in the fullest sense without
assurance of eternity?
But at the same time the absurd man realizes that hitherto he
was bound to that postulate of freedom on the illusion of which he
was living. In a certain sense, that hampered him. To the extent to
which he imagined a purpose to his life, he adapted himself to the
demands of a purpose to be achieved and became the slave of his
liberty. Thus I could not act otherwise than as the father (or the
engineer or the leader of a nation, or the post-office sub-clerk) that
I am preparing to be. I think I can choose to be that rather than
something else. I think so unconsciously, to be sure. But at the
same time I strengthen my postulate with the beliefs of those
around me, with the presumptions of my human environment
(others are so sure of being free, and that cheerful mood is so
contagious!). However far one may remain from any presumption,
moral or social, one is partly influenced by them and even, for the
best among them (there are good and bad presumptions), one
adapts one’s life to them. Thus the absurd man realizes that he was
not really free. To speak clearly, to the extent to which I hope, to
which I worry about a truth that might be individual to me, about a
way of being or creating, to the extent to which I arrange my life
and prove thereby that I accept its having a meaning, I create for
myself barriers between which I confine my life. I do like so many
bureaucrats of the mind and heart who only fill me with disgust
and whose only vice, I now see clearly, is to take man’s freedom
seriously.
The absurd enlightens me on this point: there is no future.
Henceforth this is the reason for my inner freedom. I shall use two
comparisons here. Mystics, to begin with, find freedom in giving
themselves. By losing themselves in their god, by accepting his
rules, they become secretly free. In spontaneously accepted slavery
they recover a deeper independence. But what does that freedom
mean? It may be said, above all, that they feel free with regard to
themselves, and not so much free as liberated. Likewise,
completely turned toward death (taken here as the most obvious
absurdity), the absurd man feels released from everything outside
that passionate attention crystallizing in him. He enjoys a freedom
with regard to common rules. It can be seen at this point that the
initial themes of existential philosophy keep their entire value. The
return to consciousness, the escape from everyday sleep represent
the first steps of absurd freedom. But it is existential preaching that
is alluded to, and with it that spiritual leap which basically escapes
consciousness. In the same way (this is my second comparison) the
slaves of antiquity did not belong to themselves. But they knew
that freedom which consists in not feeling responsible.^ Death,
too, has patrician hands which, while crushing, also liberate.
Losing oneself in that bottomless certainty, feeling henceforth
sufficiently remote from one’s own life to increase it and take a
broad view of it—this involves the principle of a liberation. Such
new independence has a definite time limit, like any freedom of
action. It does not write a check on eternity. But it takes the place
of the illusions of freedom, which all stopped with death. The
divine availability of the condemned man before whom the prison
doors open in a certain early dawn, that unbelievable
disinterestedness with regard to everything except for the pure
flame of life—it is clear that death and the absurd are here the
principles of the only reasonable freedom: that which a human
heart can experience and live. This is a second consequence. The
absurd man thus catches sight of a burning and frigid, transparent
and limited universe in which nothing is possible but everything is
given, and beyond which all is collapse and nothingness. He can
then decide to accept such a universe and draw from it his strength,
his refusal to hope, and the unyielding evidence of a life without
consolation.
But what does life mean in such a universe? Nothing else for
the moment but indifference to the future and a desire to use up
everything that is given. Belief in the meaning of life always
implies a scale of values, a choice, our preferences. Belief in the
absurd, according to our definitions, teaches the contrary. But this
is worth examining.
Knowing whether or not one can live without appeal is all that
interests me. I do not want to get out of my depth. This aspect of
life being given me, can I adapt myself to it? Now, faced with this
particular concern, belief in the absurd is tantamount to
substituting the quantity of experiences for the quality. If I
convince myself that this life has no other aspect than that of the
absurd, if I feel that its whole equilibrium depends on that
perpetual opposition between my conscious revolt and the darkness
in which it struggles, if I admit that my freedom has no meaning
except in relation to its limited fate, then I must say that what
counts is not the best living but the most living. It is not up to me
to wonder if this is vulgar or revolting, elegant or deplorable. Once
and for all, value judgments are discarded here in favor of factual
judgments. I have merely to draw the conclusions from what I can
see and to risk nothing that is hypothetical. Supposing that living in
this way were not honorable, then true propriety would command
me to be dishonorable.
The most living; in the broadest sense, that rule means nothing.
It calls for definition. It seems to begin with the fact that the notion
of quantity has not been sufficiently explored. For it can account
for a large share of human experience. A man’s rule of conduct
and his scale of values have no meaning except through the
quantity and variety of experiences he has been in a position to
accumulate. Now, the conditions of modern life impose on the
majority of men the same quantity of experiences and
consequently the same profound experience. To be sure, there must
also be taken into consideration the individual’s spontaneous
contribution, the “given” element in him. But I cannot judge of
that, and let me repeat that my rule here is to get along with the
immediate evidence. I see, then, that the individual character of a
common code of ethics lies not so much in the ideal importance of
its basic principles as in the norm of an experience that it is
possible to measure. To stretch a point somewhat, the Greeks had
the code of their leisure just as we have the code of our eight-hour
day. But already many men among the most tragic cause us to
foresee that a longer experience changes this table of values. They
make us imagine that adventurer of the everyday who through
mere quantity of experiences would break all records (I am
purposely using this sports expression) and would thus win his
own code of ethics.^ Yet let’s avoid romanticism and just ask
ourselves what such an attitude may mean to a man with his mind
made up to take up his bet and to observe strictly what he takes to
be the rules of the game.
Breaking all the records is first and foremost being faced with
the world as often as possible. How can that be done without
contradictions and without playing on words? For on the one hand
the absurd teaches that all experiences are unimportant, and on the
other it urges toward the greatest quantity of experiences. How,
then, can one fail to do as so many of those men I was speaking of
earlier—choose the form of life that brings us the most possible of
that human matter, thereby introducing a scale of values that on the
other hand one claims to reject?
But again it is the absurd and its contradictory life that teaches
us. For the mistake is thinking that that quantity of experiences
depends on the circumstances of our life when it depends solely on
us. Here we have to be over-simple. To two men living the same
number of years, the world always provides the same sum of
experiences. It is up to us to be conscious of them. Being aware of
one’s life, one’s revolt, one’s freedom, and to the maximum, is
living, and to the maximum. Where lucidity dominates, the scale of
values becomes useless. Let’s be even more simple. Let us say that
the sole obstacle, the sole deficiency to be made good, is
constituted by premature death. Thus it is that no depth, no
emotion, no passion, and no sacrifice could render equal in the
eyes of the absurd man (even if he wished it so) a conscious life of
forty years and a lucidity spread over sixty years.^ Madness and
death are his irreparables. Man does not choose. The absurd and
the extra life it involves therefore do not defend on man’s will, but
on its contrary, which is death.^ Weighing words carefully, it is
altogether a question of luck. One just has to be able to consent to
this. There will never be any substitute for twenty years of life and
experience.
By what is an odd inconsistency in such an alert race, the
Greeks claimed that those who died young were beloved of the
gods. And that is true only if you are willing to believe that
entering the ridiculous world of the gods is forever losing the
purest of joys, which is feeling, and feeling on this earth. The
present and the succession of presents before a constantly
conscious soul is the ideal of the absurd man. But the word “ideal”
rings false in this connection. It is not even his vocation, but
merely the third consequence of his reasoning. Having started from
an anguished awareness of the inhuman, the meditation on the
absurd returns at the end of its itinerary to the very heart of the
passionate flames of human revolt.^
* * *
Thus I draw from the absurd three consequences, which are my
revolt, my freedom, and my passion. By the mere activity of
consciousness I transform into a rule of life what was an invitation
to death—and I refuse suicide. I know, to be sure, the dull
resonance that vibrates throughout these days. Yet I have but a
word to say: that it is necessary. When Nietzsche writes: “It clearly
seems that the chief thing in heaven and on earth is to obey at
length and in a single direction: in the long run there results
something for which it is worth the trouble of living on this earth
as, for example, virtue, art, music, the dance, reason, the mind—
something that transfigures, something delicate, mad, or divine,”
he elucidates the rule of a really distinguished code of ethics. But
he also points the way of the absurd man. Obeying the flame is
both the easiest and the hardest thing to do. However, it is good for
man to judge himself occasionally. He is alone in being able to do
so.
“Prayer,” says Alain, “is when night descends over thought.”
“But the mind must meet the night,” reply the mystics and the
existentials. Yes, indeed, but not that night that is bom under
closed eyelids and through the mere will of man—dark,
impenetrable night that the mind calls up in order to plunge into it.
If it must encounter a night, let it be rather that of despair, which
remains lucid—polar night, vigil of the mind, whence will arise
perhaps that white and virginal brightness which outlines every
object in the light of the intelligence. At that degree, equivalence
encounters passionate understanding. Then it is no longer even a
question of judging the existential leap. It resumes its place amid
the age-old fresco of human attitudes. For the spectator, if he is
conscious, that leap is still absurd. In so far as it thinks it solves the
paradox, it reinstates it intact. On this score, it is stirring. On this
score, everything resumes its place and the absurd world is reborn
in all its splendor and diversity.
But it is bad to stop, hard to be satisfied with a single way of
seeing, to go without contradiction, perhaps the most subtle of all
spiritual forces. The preceding merely defines a way of thinking.
But the point is to live.
The Absurd Man
If Stavrogin believes, he does not think he believes. If he does
not believe, he does not think he does not believe.
—The Possessed
My field,” said Goethe, “is time.” That is indeed the absurd
speech. What, in fact, is the absurd man? He who, without
negating it, does nothing for the eternal. Not that nostalgia is
foreign to him. But he prefers his courage and his reasoning. The
first teaches him to live without appeal and to get along with what
he has; the second informs him of his limits. Assured of his
temporally limited freedom, of his revolt devoid of future, and of
his mortal consciousness, he lives out his adventure within the
span of his lifetime. That is his field, that is his action, which he
shields from any judgment but his own. A greater life cannot mean
for him another life. That would be unfair. I am not even speaking
here of that paltry eternity that is called posterity. Mine Roland
relied on herself. That rashness was taught a lesson. Posterity is
glad to quote her remark, but forgets to judge it. Mine Roland is
indifferent to posterity.
There can be no question of holding forth on ethics. I have seen
people behave badly with great morality and I note every day that
integrity has no need of rules. There is but one moral code that the
absurd man can accept, the one that is not separated from God: the
one that is dictated. But it so happens that he lives outside that
God. As for the others (I mean also immoralism), the absurd man
sees nothing in them but justifications and he has nothing to
justify. I start out here from the principle of his innocence.
That innocence is to be feared. “Everything is permitted,”
exclaims Ivan Karamazov. That, too, smacks of the absurd. But on
condition that it not be taken in the vulgar sense. I don’t know
whether or not it has been sufficiently pointed out that it is not an
outburst of relief or of joy, but rather a bitter acknowledgment of a
fact. The certainty of a God giving a meaning to life far surpasses
in attractiveness the ability to behave badly with impunity. The
choice would not be hard to make. But there is no choice, and that
is where the bitterness comes in. The absurd does not liberate; it
binds. It does not authorize all actions. “Everything is permitted”
does not mean that nothing is forbidden. The absurd merely
confers an equivalence on the consequences of those actions. It
does not recommend crime, for this would be childish, but it
restores to remorse its futility. Likewise, if all experiences are
indifferent, that of duty is as legitimate as any other. One can be
virtuous through a whim.
All systems of morality are based on the idea that an action has
consequences that legitimize or cancel it. A mind imbued with the
absurd merely judges that those consequences must be considered
calmly. It is ready to pay up. In other words, there may be
responsible persons, but there are no guilty ones, in its opinion. At
very most, such a mind will consent to use past experience as a
basis for its future actions. Time will prolong time, and life will
serve life. In this field that is both limited and bulging with
possibilities, everything in himself, except his lucidity, seems
unforeseeable to him. What rule, then, could emanate from that
unreasonable order? The only truth that might seem instructive to
him is not formal: it comes to life and unfolds in men. The absurd
mind cannot so much expect ethical rules at the end of its
reasoning as, rather, illustrations and the breath of human lives.
The few following images are of this type. They prolong the
absurd reasoning by giving it a specific attitude and their warmth.
Do I need to develop the idea that an example is not necessarily
an example to be followed (even less so, if possible, in the absurd
world) and that these illustrations are not therefore models?
Besides the fact that a certain vocation is required for this, one
becomes ridiculous, with all due allowance, when drawing from
Rousseau the conclusion that one must walk on all fours and from
Nietzsche that one must maltreat one’s mother. “It is essential to be
absurd,” writes a modern author, “it is not essential to be a dupe.”
The attitudes of which I shall treat can assume their whole
meaning only through consideration of their contraries. A sub¬
clerk in the post office is the equal of a conqueror if consciousness
is common to them. All experiences are indifferent in this regard.
There are some that do either a service or a disservice to man.
They do him a service if he is conscious. Otherwise, that has no
importance: a man’s failures imply judgment, not of
circumstances, but of himself.
I am choosing solely men who aim only to expend themselves
or whom I see to be expending themselves. That has no further
implications. For the moment I want to speak only of a world in
which thoughts, like lives, are devoid of future. Everything that
makes man work and get excited utilizes hope. The sole thought
that is not mendacious is therefore a sterile thought. In the absurd
world the value of a notion or of a life is measured by its sterility.
Don Juanism
If it were sufficient to love, things would be too easy. The more
one loves, the stronger the absurd grows. It is not through lack of
love that Don Juan goes from woman to woman. It is ridiculous to
represent him as a mystic in quest of total love. But it is indeed
because he loves them with the same passion and each time with
his whole self that he must repeat his gift and his profound quest.
Whence each woman hopes to give him what no one has ever
given him. Each time they are utterly wrong and merely manage to
make him feel the need of that repetition. “At last,” exclaims one
of them, “I have given you love.” Can we be surprised that Don
Juan laughs at this? “At last? No,” he says, “but once more.” Why
should it be essential to love rarely in order to love much?
Is Don Juan melancholy? This is not likely. I shall barely have
recourse to the legend. That laugh, the conquering insolence, that
playfulness and love of the theater are all clear and joyous. Every
healthy creature tends to multiply himself. So it is with Don Juan.
But, furthermore, melancholy people have two reasons for being
so: they don’t know or they hope. Don Juan knows and does not
hope. He reminds one of those artists who know their limits, never
go beyond them, and in that precarious interval in which they take
their spiritual stand enjoy all the wonderful ease of masters. And
that is indeed genius: the intelligence that knows its frontiers. Up
to the frontier of physical death Don Juan is ignorant of
melancholy. The moment he knows, his laugh bursts forth and
makes one forgive everything. He was melancholy at the time
when he hoped. Today, on the mouth of that woman he recognizes
the bitter and comforting taste of the only knowledge. Bitter?
Barely: that necessary imperfection that makes happiness
perceptible!
It is quite false to try to see in Don Juan a man brought up on
Ecclesiastes. For nothing is vanity to him except the hope of
another life. He proves this because he gambles that other life
against heaven itself. Longing for desire killed by satisfaction, that
commonplace of the impotent man, does not belong to him. That is
all right for Faust, who believed in God enough to sell himself to
the devil. For Don Juan the thing is simpler. Molina’s Burlador
ever replies to the threats of hell: “What a long respite you give
me!” What comes after death is futile, and what a long succession
of days for whoever knows how to be alive! Faust craved worldly
goods; the poor man had only to stretch out his hand. It already
amounted to selling his soul when he was unable to gladden it. As
for satiety, Don Juan insists upon it, on the contrary. If he leaves a
woman it is not absolutely because he has ceased to desire her. A
beautiful woman is always desirable. But he desires another, and
no, this is not the same thing.
This life gratifies his every wish, and nothing is worse than
losing it. This madman is a great wise man. But men who live on
hope do not thrive in this universe where kindness yields to
generosity, affection to virile silence, and communion to solitary
courage. And all hasten to say: “He was a weakling, an idealist or a
saint.” One has to disparage the greatness that insults.
* * *
People are sufficiently annoyed (or that smile of complicity
that debases what it admires) by Don Juan’s speeches and by that
same remark that he uses on all women. But to anyone who seeks
quantity in his joys, the only thing that matters is efficacy. What is
the use of complicating the passwords that have stood the test? No
one, neither the woman nor the man, listens to them, but rather to
the voice that pronounces them. They are the rule, the convention,
and the courtesy. After they are spoken the most important still
remains to be done. Don Juan is already getting ready for it. Why
should he give himself a problem in morality? He is not like
Milosz’s Manara, who damns himself through a desire to be a
saint. Hell for him is a thing to be provoked. He has but one reply
to divine wrath, and that is human honor: “I have honor,” he says
to the Commander, “and I am keeping my promise because I am a
knight.” But it would be just as great an error to make an
immoralist of him. In this regard, he is “like everyone else”: he has
the moral code of his likes and dislikes. Don Juan can be properly
understood only by constant reference to what he commonly
symbolizes: the ordinary seducer and the sexual athlete. He is an
ordinary seducer.^ Except for the difference that he is conscious,
and that is why he is absurd. A seducer who has become lucid will
not change for all that. Seducing is his condition in life. Only in
novels does one change condition or become better. Yet it can be
said that at the same time nothing is changed and everything is
transformed. What Don Juan realizes in action is an ethic of
quantity, whereas the saint, on the contrary, tends toward quality.
Not to believe in the profound meaning of things belongs to the
absurd man. As for those cordial or wonder-struck faces, he eyes
them, stores them up, and does not pause over them. Time keeps
up with him. The absurd man is he who is not apart from time. Don
Juan does not think of “collecting” women. He exhausts their
number and with them his chances of life. “Collecting” amounts to
being capable of living off one’s past. But he rejects regret, that
other form of hope. He is incapable of looking at portraits.
* * *
Is he selfish for all that? In his way, probably. But here, too, it
is essential to understand one another.
There are those who are made for living and those who are
made for loving. At least Don Juan would be inclined to say so.
But he would do so in a very few words such as he is capable of
choosing. For the love we are speaking of here is clothed in
illusions of the eternal. As all the specialists in passion teach us,
there is no eternal love but what is thwarted. There is scarcely any
passion without struggle. Such a love culminates only in the
ultimate contradiction of death. One must be Werther or nothing.
There, too, there are several ways of committing suicide, one of
which is the total gift and forget-fulness of self. Don Juan, as well
as anyone else, knows that this can be stirring. But he is one of the
very few who know that this is not the important thing. He knows
just as well that those who turn away from all personal life through
a great love enrich themselves perhaps but certainly impoverish
those their love has chosen. A mother or a passionate wife
necessarily has a closed heart, for it is turned away from the world.
A single emotion, a single creature, a single face, but all is
devoured. Quite a different love disturbs Don Juan, and this one is
liberating. It brings with it all the faces in the world, and its tremor
comes from the fact that it knows itself to be mortal. Don Juan has
chosen to be nothing.
For him it is a matter of seeing clearly. We call love what binds
us to certain creatures only by reference to a collective way of
seeing for which books and legends are responsible. But of love I
know only that mixture of desire, affection, and intelligence that
binds me to this or that creature. That compound is not the same
for another person. I do not have the right to cover all these
experiences with the same name. This exempts one from
conducting them with the same gestures. The absurd man
multiplies here again what he cannot unify. Thus he discovers a
new way of being which liberates him at least as much as it
liberates those who approach him. There is no noble love but that
which recognizes itself to be both short-lived and exceptional. All
those deaths and all those rebirths gathered together as in a sheaf
make up for Don Juan the flowering of his life. It is his way of
giving and of vivifying. I let it be decided whether or not one can
speak of selfishness.
* * *
I think at this point of all those who absolutely insist that Don
Juan be punished. Not only in another life, but even in this one. I
think of all those tales, legends, and laughs about the aged Don
Juan. But Don Juan is already ready. To a conscious man old age
and what it portends are not a surprise. Indeed, he is conscious
only in so far as he does not conceal its horror from himself There
was in Athens a temple dedicated to old age. Children were taken
there. As for Don Juan, the more people laugh at him, the more his
figure stands out. Thereby he rejects the one the romantics lent
him. No one wants to laugh at that tormented, pitiful Don Juan. He
is pitied; heaven itself will redeem him? But that’s not it. In the
universe of which Don Juan has a glimpse, ridicule too is included.
He would consider it nonnal to be chastised. That is the rule of the
game. And, indeed, it is typical of his nobility to have accepted all
the rules of the game. Yet he knows he is right and that there can
be no question of punishment. A fate is not a punishment.
That is his crime, and how easy it is to understand why the men
of God call down punishment on his head. He achieves a
knowledge without illusions which negates everything they
profess. Loving and possessing, conquering and consuming—that
is his way of knowing. (There is significance in that favorite
Scriptural word that calls the carnal act “knowing.”) He is their
worst enemy to the extent that he is ignorant of them. A chronicler
relates that the true Burlador died assassinated by Fransciscans
who wanted “to put an end to the excesses and blasphemies of Don
Juan, whose birth assured him impunity.” Then they proclaimed
that heaven had struck him down. No one has proved that strange
end. Nor has anyone proved the contrary. But without wondering if
it is probable, I can say that it is logical. I want merely to single out
at this point the word “birth” and to play on words: it was the fact
of living that assured his innocence. It was from death alone that
he derived a guilt now become legendary.
What else does that stone Commander signify, that cold statue
set in motion to punish the blood and courage that dared to think?
All the powers of eternal Reason, of order, of universal morality,
all the foreign grandeur of a God open to wrath are summed up in
him. That gigantic and soulless stone merely symbolizes the forces
that Don Juan negated forever. But the Commander’s mission
stops there. The thunder and lightning can return to the imitation
heaven whence they were called forth. The real tragedy takes place
quite apart from them. No, it was not under a stone hand that Don
Juan met his death. I am inclined to believe in the legendary
bravado, in that mad laughter of the healthy man provoking a non¬
existent God. But, above all, I believe that on that evening when
Don Juan was waiting at Anna’s the Commander didn’t come, and
that after midnight the blasphemer must have felt the dreadful
bitterness of those who have been right. I accept even more readily
the account of his life that has him eventually burying himself in a
monastery. Not that the edifying aspect of the story can he
considered probable. What refuge can he go ask of God? But this
symbolizes rather the logical outcome of a life completely imbued
with the absurd, the grim ending of an existence turned toward
short lived joys. At this point sensual pleasure winds up in
asceticism. It is essential to realize that they may be, as it were, the
two aspects of the same destitution. What more ghastly image can
be called up than that of a man betrayed by his body who, simply
because he did not die in time, lives out the comedy while awaiting
the end, face to face with that God he does not adore, serving him
as he served life, kneeling before a void and arms outstretched
toward a heaven without eloquence that he knows to he also
without depth?
I see Don Juan in a cell of one of those Spanish monasteries
lost on a hilltop. And if he contemplates anything at all, it is not the
ghosts of past loves, but perhaps, through a narrow slit in the sun¬
baked wall, some silent Spanish plain, a noble, soulless land in
which he recognizes himself. Yes, it is on this melancholy and
radiant image that the curtain must be rung down. The ultimate
end, awaited but never desired, the ultimate end is negligible.
Drama
“The play’s the thing,” says Hamlet, “wherein I’ll catch the
conscience of the king.”
“Catch” is indeed the word. For conscience moves swiftly or
withdraws within itself. It has to be caught on the wing, at that
barely perceptible moment when it glances fleetingly at itself. The
everyday man does not enjoy tarrying. Everything, on the contrary,
hurries him onward. But at the same time nothing interests him
more than himself, especially his potentialities. Whence his interest
in the theater, in the show, where so many fates are offered him,
where he can accept the poetry without feeling the sorrow. There at
least can be recognized the thoughtless man, and he continues to
hasten toward some hope or other. The absurd man begins where
that one leaves off, where, ceasing to admire the play, the mind
wants to enter in. Entering into all these lives, experiencing them
in their diversity, amounts to acting them out. I am not saying that
actors in general obey that impulse, that they are absurd men, but
that their fate is an absurd fate which might charm and attract a
lucid heart. It is necessary to establish this in order to grasp
without misunderstanding what will follow.
The actor’s realm is that of the fleeting. Of all kinds of fame, it
is known, his is the most ephemeral. At least, this is said in
conversation. But all kinds of fame are ephemeral. From the point
of view of Sirius, Goethe’s works in ten thousand years will be
dust and his name forgotten. Perhaps a handful of archaeologists
will look for “evidence” as to our era. That idea has always
contained a lesson. Seriously meditated upon, it reduces our
perturbations to the profound nobility that is found in indifference.
Above all, it directs our concerns toward what is most certain—
that is, toward the immediate. Of all kinds of fame the least
deceptive is the one that is lived.
Hence the actor has chosen multiple fame, the fame that is
hallowed and tested. From the fact that everything is to die
someday he draws the best conclusion. An actor succeeds or does
not succeed. A writer has some hope even if he is not appreciated.
He assumes that his works will bear witness to what he was. At
best the actor will leave us a photograph, and nothing of what he
was himself, his gestures and his silences, his gasping or his
panting with love, will come down to us. For him, not to be known
is not to act, and not acting is dying a hundred times with all the
creatures he would have brought to life or resuscitated.
Why should we be surprised to find a fleeting fame built upon
the most ephemeral of creations? The actor has three hours to be
Iago or Alceste, Phedre or Gloucester. In that short space of time
he makes them come to life and die on fifty square yards of boards.
Never has the absurd been so well illustrated or at such length.
What more revelatory epitome can be imagined than those
marvelous lives, those exceptional and total desti—
nies unfolding for a few hours within a stage set? Off the stage,
Sigismundo ceases to count. Two hours later he is seen dining out.
Then it is, perhaps, that life is a dream. But after Sigismundo
comes another. The hero suffering from uncertainty takes the place
of the man roaring for his revenge. By thus sweeping over
centuries and minds, by miming man as he can be and as he is, the
actor has much in common with that other absurd individual, the
traveler. Like him, he drains something and is constantly on the
move. He is a traveler in time and, for the best, the hunted traveler,
pursued by souls. If ever the ethics of quantity could find
sustenance, it is indeed on that strange stage. To what degree the
actor benefits from the characters is hard to say. But that is not the
important thing. It is merely a matter of knowing how far he
identifies hitnself with those irreplaceable lives. It often happens
that he carries them with him, that they somewhat overflow the
time and place in which they were born. They accompany the
actor, who cannot very readily separate himself from what he has
been. Occasionally when reaching for his glass he resumes
Hamlet’s gesture of raising his cup. No, the distance separating
him from the creatures into whom he infuses life is not so great. He
abundantly illustrates every month or every day that so suggestive
truth that there is no frontier between what a man wants to be and
what he is. Always concerned with better representing, he
demonstrates to what a degree appearing creates being. For that is
his art—to simulate absolutely, to project himself as deeply as
possible into lives that are not his own. At the end of his effort his
vocation becomes clear: to apply himself wholeheartedly to being
nothing or to being several. The narrower the limits allotted him
for creating his character, the more necessary his talent. He will die
in three hours under the mask he has assumed today. Within three
hours he must experience and express a whole exceptional life.
That is called losing oneself to find oneself. In those three hours he
travels the whole course of the dead-end path that the man in the
audience takes a lifetime to cover.
A mime of the ephemeral, the actor trains and perfects himself
only in appearances. The theatrical convention is that the heart
expresses itself and communicates itself only through gestures and
in the body—or through the voice, which is as much of the soul as
of the body. The rule of that art insists that everything be
magnified and translated into flesh. If it were essential on the stage
to love as people really love, to employ that irreplaceable voice of
the heart, to look as people contemplate in life, our speech would
be in code. But here silences must make themselves heard. Love
speaks up louder, and immobility itself becomes spectacular. The
body is king, Not everyone can be “theatrical,” and this unjustly
maligned word covers a whole aesthetic and a whole ethic. Half a
man’s life is spent in implying, in turning away, and in keeping
silent. Here the actor is the intruder. He breaks the spell chaining
that soul, and at last the passions can rush onto their stage. They
speak in every gesture; they live only through shouts and cries.
Thus the actor creates his characters for display. He outlines or
sculptures them and slips into their imaginary form, transfusing his
blood into their phantoms. I am of course speaking of great drama,
the kind that gives the actor an opportunity to fulfill his wholly
physical fate. Take Shakespeare, for instance. In that impulsive
drama the physical passions lead the dance. They explain
everything. Without them all would collapse. Never would King
Lear keep the appointment set by madness without the brutal
gesture that exiles Cordelia and condemns Edgar. It is just that the
unfolding of that tragedy should thenceforth be dominated by
madness. Souls are given over to the demons and their saraband.
No fewer than four madmen: one by trade, another by intention,
and the last two through suffering—four disordered bodies, four
unutterable aspects of a single condition.
The very scale of the human body is inadequate. The mask and
the buskin, the make-up that reduces and accentuates the face in its
essential elements, the costume that exaggerates and simplifies—
that universe sacrifices everything to appearance and is made
solely for the eye. Through an absurd miracle, it is the body that
also brings knowledge. I should never really understand Iago
unless I played his part. It is not enough to hear him, for I grasp
him only at the moment when I see him. Of the absurd character
the actor consequently has the monotony, that single, oppressive
silhouette, simultaneously strange and familiar, that he carries
about from hero to hero. There, too, the great dramatic work
contributes to this unity of tone.^ This is where the actor
contradicts himself: the same and yet so various, so many souls
summed up in a single body. Yet it is the absurd contradiction
itself, that individual who wants to achieve everything and live
everything, that useless attempt, that ineffectual persistence. What
always contradicts itself nevertheless joins in him. He is at that
point where body and mind converge, where the mind, tired of its
defeats, turns toward its most faithful ally. “And blest are those,”
says Hamlet, “whose blood and judgment are so well commingled
that they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger to sound what stop she
please.”
How could the Church have failed to condemn such a practice
on the part of the actor? She repudiated in that art the heretical
multiplication of souls, the emotional debauch, the scandalous
presumption of a mind that objects to living but one life and hurls
itself into all forms of excess. She proscribed in them that
preference for the present and that triumph of Proteus which are
the negation of everything she teaches. Eternity is not a game. A
mind foolish enough to prefer a comedy to eternity has lost its
salvation. Between “everywhere” and “forever” there is no
compromise. Whence that much maligned profession can give rise
to a tremendous spiritual conflict. “What matters,” said Nietzsche,
“is not eternal life but eternal vivacity.” All drama is, in fact, in
this choice. Celimene against Elianthe, the whole subject in the
absurd consequence of a nature carried to its extreme, and the
verse itself, the “bad verse,” barely accented l ik e the monotony of
the character’s nature.
Adrienne Lecouvreur on her deathbed was willing to confess
and receive communion, but refused to abjure her profession. She
thereby lost the benefit of the confession. Did this not amount, in
effect, to choosing her absorbing passion in preference to God?
And that woman in the death throes refusing in tears to repudiate
what she called her art gave evidence of a greatness that she never
achieved behind the footlights. This was her finest role and the
hardest one to play. Choosing between heaven and a ridiculous
fidelity, preferring oneself to eternity or losing oneself in God is
the age-old tragedy in which each must play his part.
The actors of the era knew they were excommunicated.
Entering the profession amounted to choosing Hell. And the
Church discerned in them her worst enemies. A few men of letters
protest: “What! Refuse the last rites to Moliere!” But that was just,
and especially in one who died onstage and finished under the
actor’s make-up a life entirely devoted to dispersion. In his case
genius is invoked, which excuses everything. But genius excuses
nothing, just because it refuses to do so.
The actor knew at that time what punishment was in store for
him. But what significance could such vague threats have
compared to the final punishment that life itself was reserving for
him? This was the one that he felt in advance and accepted wholly.
To the actor as to the absurd man, a premature death is irreparable.
Nothing can make up for the sum of faces and centuries he would
otherwise have traversed. But in any case, one has to die. For the
actor is doubtless everywhere, but time sweeps him along, too, and
makes its impression with him.
It requires but a little imagination to feel what an actor’s fate
means. It is in time that he makes up and enumerates his
characters. It is in time likewise that he learns to dominate them.
The greater number of different lives he has lived, the more aloof
he can be from them. The time comes when he must die to the
stage and for the world. What he has lived faces him. He sees
clearly. He feels the harrowing and irreplaceable quality of that
adventure. He knows and can now die. There are homes for aged
actors.
Conquest
“No,” says the conqueror, “don’t assume that because I love
action I have had to forget how to think. On the contrary I can
throughly define what I believe. For I believe it firmly and I see it
surely and clearly. Beware of those who say: ‘I know this too well
to be able to express it.’ For if they cannot do so, this is because
they don’t know it or because out of laziness they stopped at the
outer crust.
“I have not many opinions. At the end of a life man notices that
he has spent years becoming sure of a single truth. But a single
truth, if it is obvious, is enough to guide an existence. As for me, I
decidedly have something to say about the individual. One must
speak of him bluntly and, if need be, with the appropriate
contempt.
“A man is more a man through the things he keeps to himself
than through those he says. There are many that I shall keep to
myself. But I firmly believe that all those who have judged the
individual have done so with much less experience than we on
which to base their judgment. The intelligence, the stirring
intelligence perhaps foresaw what it was essential to note. But the
era, its ruins, and its blood overwhelm us with facts. It was
possible for ancient nations, and even for more recent ones down
to our machine age, to weigh one against the other the virtues of
society and of the individual, to try to find out which was to serve
the other. To begin with, that was possible by virtue of that
stubborn aberration in man’s heart according to which human
beings were created to serve or be served. In the second place, it
was possible because neither society nor the individual had yet
revealed all their ability.
“I have seen bright minds express astonishment at the
masterpieces of Dutch painters born at the height of the bloody
wars in Flanders, be amazed by the prayers of Silesian mystics
brought up during the frightful Thirty Years’ War. Eternal values
survive secular turmoils before their astonished eyes. But there has
been progress since. The painters of today are deprived of such
serenity. Even if they have basically the heart the creator needs—I
mean the closed heart—it is of no use; for everyone, including the
saint himself, is mobilized. This is perhaps what I have felt most
deeply. At every form that miscarries in the trenches, at every
outline, metaphor, or prayer crushed under steel, the eternal loses a
round. Conscious that I cannot stand aloof from my time, I have
decided to be an integral part of it. This is why I esteem the
individual only because he strikes me as ridiculous and humiliated.
Knowing that there are no victorious causes, I have a liking for lost
causes: they require an uncontaminated soul, equal to its defeat as
to its temporary victories. For anyone who feels bound up with this
world’s fate, the clash of civilizations has something agonizing
about it. I have made that anguish mine at the same time that I
wanted to join in. Between history and the eternal I have chosen
history because I like certainties. Of it, at least, I am certain, and
how can I deny this force crushing me?
“There always comes a time when one must choose between
contemplation and action. This is called becoming a man. Such
wrenches are dreadful. But for a proud heart there can be no
compromise. There is God or time, that cross or this sword. This
world has a higher meaning that transcends its worries, or nothing
is true but those worries. One must live with time and die with it,
or else elude it for a greater life. I know that one can compromise
and live in the world while believing in the eternal. That is called
accepting. But I loathe this tenn and want all or nothing. If I
choose action, don’t think that contemplation is like an unknown
country to me. But it cannot give me everything, and, deprived of
the eternal, I want to ally myself with time. I do not want to put
down to my account either nostalgia or bitterness, and I merely
want to see clearly. I tell you, tomorrow you will be mobilized. For
you and for me that is a liberation. The individual can do nothing
and yet he can do everything. In that wonderful unattached state
you understand why I exalt and crush him at one and the same
time. It is the world that pulverizes him and I who liberate him. I
provide him with all his rights.
“Conquerors know that action is in itself useless. There is but
one useful action, that of remaking man and the earth. I shall never
remake men. But one must do ’as if.’ For the path of struggle leads
me to the flesh. Even humiliated, the flesh is my only certainty. I
can live only on it. The creature is my native land. This is why I
have chosen this absurd and ineffectual effort. This is why I am on
the side of the struggle. The epoch lends itself to this, as I have
said. Hitherto the greatness of a conqueror was geographical. It
was measured by the extent of the conquered territories. There is a
reason why the word has changed in meaning and has ceased to
signify the victorious general. The greatness has changed camp. It
lies in protest and the blind-alley sacrifice. There, too, it is not
through a preference for defeat. Victory would be desirable. But
there is but one victory, and it is eternal. That is the one I shall
never have. That is where I stumble and cling. A revolution is
always accomplished against the gods, beginning with the
revolution of Prometheus, the first of modern conquerors. It is
man’s demands made against his fate; the demands of the poor are
but a pretext. Yet I can seize that spirit only in its historical act,
and that is where I make contact with it. Don’t assume, however,
that I take pleasure in it: opposite the essential contradiction, I
maintain my human contradiction. I establish my lucidity in the
midst of what negates it. I exalt man be-fore what crushes him, and
my freedom, my revolt, and my passion come together then in that
tension, that lucidity, and that vast repetition.
“Yes, man is his own end. And he is his only end. If he aims to
be something, it is in this life. Now I know it only too well.
Conquerors sometimes talk of vanquishing and overcoming. But it
is always ‘overcoming oneself that they mean. You are well aware
of what that means. Every man has felt himself to be the equal of a
god at certain moments. At least, this is the way it is expressed.
But this comes from the fact that in a flash he felt the amazing
grandeur of the human mind. The conquerors are merely those
among men who are conscious enough of their strength to be sure
of living constantly on those heights and fully aware of that
grandeur. It is a question of arithmetic, of more or less. The
conquerors are capable of the more. But they are capable of no
more than man himself when he wants. This is why they never
leave the human crucible, plunging into the seething soul of
revolutions.
“There they find the creature mutilated, but they also encounter
there the only values they like and admire, man and his silence.
This is both their destitution and their wealth. There is but one
luxury for them—that of human relations. How can one fail to
realize that in this vulnerable universe everything that is human
and solely human assumes a more vivid meaning? Taut faces,
threatened fraternity, such strong and chaste friendship among
men—these are the true riches because they are transitory. In their
midst the mind is most aware of its powers and limitations. That is
to say, its efficacity. Some have spoken of genius. But genius is
easy to say; I prefer the intelligence. It must be said that it can be
magnificent then. It lights up this desert and dominates it. It knows
its obligations and illustrates them. It will die at the same time as
this body. But knowing this constitutes its freedom.
“We are not ignorant of the fact that all churches are against us.
A heart so keyed up eludes the eternal, and all churches, divine or
political, lay claim to the eternal. Happiness and courage,
retribution or justice are secondary ends for them. It is a doctrine
they bring, and one must subscribe to it. But I have no concern
with ideas or with the eternal. The truths that come within my
scope can be touched with the hand. I cannot separate from them.
This is why you cannot base anything on me: nothing of the
conqueror lasts, not even his doctrines.
“At the end of all that, despite everything, is death. We know
also that it ends everything. This is why those cemeteries all over
Europe, which obsess some among us, are hideous. People beautify
only what they love, and death repels us and tires our patience. It,
too, is to be conquered. The last Carrara, a prisoner in Padua
emptied by the plague and besieged by the Venetians, ran
screaming through the halls of his deserted palace: he was calling
on the devil and asking him for death. This was a way of
overcoming it. And it is likewise a mark of courage characteristic
of the Occident to have made so ugly the places where death thinks
itself honored. In the rebel s universe, death exalts injustice. It is
the supreme abuse.
“Others, without compromising either, have chosen the eternal
and denounced the illusion of this world. Their cemeteries smile
amid numerous flowers and birds. That suits the conqueror and
gives him a clear image of what he has rejected. He has chosen, on
the contrary, the black iron fence or the potter’s field. The best
among the men of God occasionally are seized with fright mingled
with consideration and pity for minds that can live with such an
image of their death. Yet those minds derive their strength and
justification from this. Our fate stands before us and we provoke
him. Less out of pride than out of awareness of our ineffectual
condition. We, too, sometimes feel pity for ourselves. It is the only
compassion that seems acceptable to us: a feeling that perhaps you
hardly understand and that seems to you scarcely virile. Yet the
most daring among us are the ones who feel it. But we call the
lucid ones virile and we do not want a strength that is apart from
lucidity.”
Let me repeat that these images do not propose moral codes
and involve no judgments: they are sketches. They merely
represent a style of life. The lover, the actor, or the adventurer
plays the absurd. But equally well, if he wishes, the chaste man,
the civil servant, or the president of the Republic. It is enough to
know and to mask nothing. In Italian museums are sometimes
found little painted screens that the priest used to hold in front of
the face of condemned men to hide the scaffold from them. The
leap in all its forms, rushing into the divine or the eternal,
surrendering to the illusions of the everyday or of the idea—all
these screens hide the absurd. But there are civil servants without
screens, and they are the ones of whom I mean to speak. I have
chosen the most extreme ones. At this level the absurd gives them
a royal power. It is true that those princes are without a kingdom.
But they have this advantage over others: they know that all
royalties are illusory. They know that is their whole nobility, and it
is useless to speak in relation to them of hidden misfortune or the
ashes of disillusion. Being deprived of hope is not despairing. The
flames of earth are surely worth celestial perfumes. Neither I nor
anyone can judge them here. They are not striving to be better;
they are attempting to be consistent. If the term “wise man” can be
applied to the man who lives on what he has without speculating
on what he has not, then they are wise men. One of them, a
conqueror but in the realm of mind, a Don Juan but of knowledge,
an actor but of the intelligence, kn ows this better than anyone:
“You nowise deserve a privilege on earth and in heaven for having
brought to perfection your dear little meek sheep; you nonetheless
continue to be at best a ridiculous dear little sheep with horns and
nothing more—even supposing that you do not burst with vanity
and do not create a scandal by posing as a judge.”
In any case, it was essential to restore to the absurd reasoning
more cordial examples. The imagination can add many others,
inseparable from time and exile, who likewise know how to live in
harmony with a universe without future and without weakness.
This absurd, godless world is, then, peopled with men who think
clearly and have ceased to hope. And I have not yet spoken of the
most absurd character, who is the creator.
Absurd Creation
Philosophy and Fiction
All those lives maintained in the rarefied air of the absurd
could not persevere without some profound and constant thought
to infuse its strength into them. Right here, it can be only a strange
feeling of fidelity. Conscious men have been seen to fulfill their
task amid the most stupid of wars without considering themselves
in contradiction. This is because it was essential to elude nothing.
There is thus a metaphysical honor in enduring the world’s
absurdity. Conquest or play-acting, multiple loves, absurd revolt
are tributes that man pays to his dignity in a campaign in which he
is defeated in advance.
It is merely a matter of being faithful to the rule of the battle.
That thought may suffice to sustain a mind; it has supported and
still supports whole civilizations. War cannot be negated. One
must live it or die of it. So it is with the absurd: it is a question of
breathing with it, of recognizing its lessons and recovering their
flesh. In this regard the absurd joy par excellence is creation. “Art
and nothing but art,” said Nietzsche; “we have art in order not to
die of the truth.”
In the experience that I am attempting to describe and to stress
on several modes, it is certain that a new torment arises wherever
another dies. The childish chasing after forgetfulness, the appeal of
satisfaction are now devoid of echo. But the constant tension that
keeps man face to face with the world, the ordered delirium that
urges him to be receptive to everything leave him another fever. In
this universe the work of art is then the sole chance of keeping his
consciousness and of fixing its adventures. Creating is living
doubly. The groping, anxious quest of a Proust, his meticulous
collecting of flowers, of wallpapers, and of anxieties, signifies
nothing else. At the same time, it has no more significance than the
continual and imperceptible creation in which the actor, the
conqueror, and all absurd men indulge every day of their lives. All
try their hands at miming, at repeating, and at recreating the reality
that is theirs. We always end up by having the appearance of our
truths. All existence for a man turned away from the eternal is but
a vast mime under the mask of the absurd. Creation is the great
mime.
Such men know to begin with, and then their whole effort is to
examine, to enlarge, and to enrich the ephemeral island on which
they have just landed. But first they must know. For the absurd
discovery coincides with a pause in which future passions are
prepared and justified. Even men without a gospel have their
Mount of Olives. And one must not fall asleep on theirs either. For
the absurd man it is not a matter of explaining and solving, but of
experiencing and describing. Everything begins with lucid
indifference.
Describing—that is the last ambition of an absurd thought.
Science likewise, having reached the end of its paradoxes, ceases
to propound and stops to contemplate and sketch the ever virgin
landscape of phenomena. The heart learns thus that the emotion
delighting us when we see the world’s aspects comes to us not
from its depth but from their diversity. Explanation is useless, but
the sensation remains and, with it, the constant attractions of a
universe inexhaustible in quantity. The place of the work of art can
be understood at this point.
It marks both the death of an experience and its multiplication.
It is a sort of monotonous and passionate repetition of the themes
already orchestrated by the world: the body, inexhaustible image
on the pediment of temples, forms or colors, number or grief. It is
therefore not indifferent, as a conclusion, to encounter once again
the principal themes of this essay in the wonderful and childish
world of the creator. It would be wrong to see a symbol in it and to
think that the work of art can be considered at last as a refuge for
the absurd. It is itself an absurd phenomenon, and we are
concerned merely with its description. It does not offer an escape
for the intellectual ailment. Rather, it is one of the symptoms of
that ailment which reflects it throughout a man’s whole thought.
But for the first time it makes the mind get outside of itself and
places it in opposition to others, not for it to get lost but to show it
clearly the blind path that all have entered upon. In the time of the
absurd reasoning, creation follows indifference and discovery. It
marks the point from which absurd passions spring and where the
reasoning stops. Its place in this essay is justified in this way.
It will suffice to bring to light a few themes common to the
creator and the thinker in order to find in the work of art all the
contradictions of thought involved in the absurd. Indeed, it is not
so much identical conclusions that prove minds to be related as the
contradictions that are common to them. So it is with thought and
creation. I hardly need to say that the same anguish urges man to
these two attitudes. This is where they coincide in the beginning.
But among all the thoughts that start from the absurd, I have seen
that very few remain within it. And through their deviations or
infidelities I have best been able to measure what belonged to the
absurd. Similarly I must wonder: is an absurd work of art possible?
*
It would be impossible to insist too much on the arbitrary
nature of the former opposition between art and philosophy. If you
insist on taking it in too limited a sense, it is certainly false. If you
mean merely that these two disciplines each have their peculiar
climate, that is probably true but remains vague. The only
acceptable argument used to he in the contradiction brought up
between the philosopher enclosed within his system and the artist
placed before his work. But this was pertinent for a certain form of
art and of philosophy which we consider secondary here. The idea
of an art detached from its creator is not only outmoded; it is false.
In opposition to the artist, it is pointed out that no philosopher ever
created several systems. But that is true in so far, indeed, as no
artist ever expressed more than one thing under different aspects.
The instantaneous perfection of art, the necessity for its renewal—
this is true only through a preconceived notion. For the work of art
likewise is a construction and everyone knows how monotonous
the great creators can be. For the same reason as the thinker, the
artist commits himself and becomes himself in his work. That
osmosis raises the most important of aesthetic problems.
Moreover, to anyone who is convinced of the mind’s singleness of
purpose, nothing is more futile than these distinctions based on
methods and objects. There are no frontiers between the disciplines
that man sets himself for understanding and loving. They interlock,
and the same anxiety merges them.
It is necessary to state this to begin with. For an absurd work of
art to be possible, thought in its most lucid form must be involved
in it. But at the same time thought must not be apparent except as
the regulating intelligence. This paradox can be explained
according to the absurd. The work of art is born of the
intelligence’s refusal to reason the concrete. It marks the triumph
of the carnal. It is lucid thought that provokes it, but in that very
act that thought repudiates itself. It will not yield to the temptation
of adding to what is described a deeper meaning that it knows to be
illegitimate. The work of art embodies a drama of the intelligence,
but it proves this only indirectly. The absurd work requires an artist
conscious of these limitations and an art in which the concrete
signifies nothing more than itself. It cannot be the end, the
meaning, and the consolation of a life. Creating or not creating
changes nothing. The absurd creator does not prize his work. He
could repudiate it. He does sometimes repudiate it. An Abyssinia
suffices for this, as in the case of Rimbaud.
At the same time a rule of aesthetics can be seen in this. The
true work of art is always on the human scale. It is essentially the
one that says “less.” There is a certain relationship between the
global experience of the artist and the work that reflects that
experience, between Wilhelm Meister and Goethe’s maturity. That
relationship is bad when the work aims to give the whole
experience in the lace-paper of an explanatory literature. That
relationship is good when the work is but a piece cut out of
experience, a facet of the diamond in which the inner luster is
epitomized without being limited. In the first case there is
overloading and pretension to the eternal. In the second, a fecund
work because of a whole implied experience, the wealth of which
is suspected. The problem for the absurd artist is to acquire this
savoir-vivre which transcends savoir-faire. And in the end, the
great artist under this climate is, above all, a great living being, it
being understood that living in this case is just as much
experiencing as reflecting. The work then embodies an intellectual
drama. The absurd work illustrates thought’s renouncing of its
prestige and its resignation to being no more than the intelligence
that works up appearances and covers with images what has no
reason. If the world were clear, art would not exist.
I am not speaking here of the arts of form or color in which
description alone prevails in its splendid modesty.^ Expression
begins where thought ends. Those adolescents with empty
eyesockets who people temples and museums—their philosophy
has been expressed in gestures. For an absurd man it is more
educative than all libraries. Under another aspect the same is true
for music. If any art is devoid of lessons, it is certainly music. It is
too closely related to mathematics not to have borrowed their
gratuitousness. That game the mind plays with itself according to
set and measured laws takes place in the sonorous compass that
belongs to us and beyond which the vibrations nevertheless meet in
an inhuman universe. There is no purer sensation. These examples
are too easy. The absurd man recognizes as his own these
harmonies and these forms.
But I should like to speak here of a work in which the
temptation to explain remains greatest, in which illusion offers
itself automatically, in which conclusion is almost inevitable. I
mean fictional creation. I propose to inquire whether or not the
absurd can hold its own there.
* * *
To think is first of all to create a world (or to limit one’s own
world, which comes to the same thing). It is starting out from the
basic disagreement that separates man from his experience in order
to find a common ground according to one’s nostalgia, a universe
hedged with reasons or lighted up with analogies but which, in any
case, gives an opportunity to rescind the unbearable divorce. The
philosopher, even if he is Kant, is a creator. He has his characters,
his symbols, and his secret action. He has his plot endings. On the
contrary, the lead taken by the novel over poetry and the essay
merely represents, despite appearances, a greater intellectualiza-
tion of the art. Let there be no mistake about it; I am speaking of
the greatest. The fecundity and the importance of a literary form
are often measured by the trash it contains. The number of bad
novels must not make us forget the value of the best. These,
indeed, carry with them their universe. The novel has its logic, its
reasonings, its intuition, and its postulates. It also has its
requirements of clarity.^
The classical opposition of which I was speaking above is even
less justified in this particular case. It held in the time when it was
easy to separate philosophy from its authors. Today when thought
has ceased to lay claim to the universal, when its best history
would be that of its repentances, we know that the system, when it
is worth while, cannot be separated from its author. The Ethics
itself, in one of its aspects, is but a long and reasoned personal
confession. Abstract thought at last returns to its prop of flesh.
And, likewise, the fictional activities of the body and of the
passions are regulated a little more according to the requirements
of a vision of the world. The writer has given up telling “stories”
and creates his universe. The great novelists are philosophical
novelists—that is, the contrary of thesis-writers. For instance,
Balzac, Sade, Melville, Stendhal, Dostoevsky, Proust, Malraux,
Kafka, to cite but a few.
But in fact the preference they have shown for writing in
images rather than in reasoned arguments is revelatory of a certain
thought that is common to them all, convinced of the uselessness
of any principle of explanation and sure of the educative message
of perceptible appearance. They consider the work of art both as an
end and a beginning. It is the outcome of an often unexpressed
philosophy, its illustration and its consummation. But it is
complete only through the implications of that philosophy. It
justifies at last that variant of an old theme that a little thought
estranges from life whereas much thought reconciles to life.
Incapable of refining the real, thought pauses to mimic it. The
novel in question is the instrument of that simultaneously relative
and inexhaustible knowledge, so like that of love. Of love, fictional
creation has the initial wonder and the fecund rumination.
These at least are the charms I see in it at the outset. But I saw
them likewise in those princes of humiliated thought whose
suicides I was later able to witness.
What interests me, indeed, is knowing and describing the force
that leads them back toward the common path of illusion. The
same method will consequently help me here. The fact of having
already utilized it will allow me to shorten my argument and to
sum it up without delay in a particular example. I want to know
whether, accepting a life without appeal, one can also agree to
work and create without appeal and what is the way leading to
these liberties. I want to liberate my universe of its phantoms and
to people it solely with flesh-and-blood truths whose presence I
cannot deny. I can perform absurd work, choose the creative
attitude rather than another. But an absurd attitude, if it is to remain
so, must remain aware of its gratuitousness. So it is with the work
of art. If the commandments of the absurd are not respected, if the
work does not illustrate divorce and revolt, if it sacrifices to
illusions and arouses hope, it ceases to be gratuitous. I can no
longer detach myself from it. My life may find a meaning in it, but
that is trifling. It ceases to be that exercise in detachment and
passion which crowns the splendor and futility of a man’s life.
In the creation in which the temptation to explain is the
strongest, can one overcome that temptation? In the fictional world
in which awareness of the real world is keenest, can I remain
faithful to the absurd without sacrificing to the desire to judge? So
many questions to be taken into consideration in a last effort. It
must be already clear what they signify. They are the last scruples
of an awareness that fears to forsake its initial and difficult lesson
in favor of a final illusion. What holds for creation, looked upon as
one of the possible attitudes for the man conscious of the absurd,
holds for all the styles of life open to him. The conqueror or the
actor, the creator or Don Juan may forget that their exercise in
living could not do without awareness of its mad character. One
becomes accustomed so quickly. A man wants to earn money in
order to be happy, and his whole effort and the best of a life are
devoted to the earning of that money. Happiness is forgotten; the
means are taken for the end. Likewise, the whole effort of this
conqueror will be diverted to ambition, which was but a way
toward a greater life. Don Juan in turn will likewise yield to his
fate, be satisfied with that existence whose nobility is of value only
through revolt. For one it is awareness and for the other, revolt; in
both cases the absurd has disappeared. There is so much stubborn
hope in the human heart. The most destitute men often end up by
accepting illusion. That approval prompted by the need for peace
inwardly parallels the existential consent. There are thus gods of
light and idols of mud. But it is essential to find the middle path
leading to the faces of man.
So far, the failures of the absurd exigence have best informed
us as to what it is. In the same way, if we are to be informed, it will
suffice to notice that fictional creation can present the same
ambiguity as certain philosophies. Hence I can choose as
illustration a work comprising everything that denotes awareness
of the absurd, having a clear starting-point and a lucid climate. Its
consequences will enlighten us. If the absurd is not respected in it,
we shall know by what expedient illusion enters in. A particular
example, a theme, a creator’s fidelity will suffice, then. This
involves the same analysis that has already been made at greater
length.
I shall examine a favorite theme of Dostoevsky. I might just as
well have studied other works.^ But in this work the problem is
treated directly, in the sense of nobility and emotion, as for the
existential philosophies already discussed. This parallelism serves
my purpose.
Kirilov
All of Dostoevsky’s heroes question themselves as to the
meaning of life. In this they are modern: they do not fear ridicule.
What distinguishes modern sensibility from classical sensibility is
that the latter thrives on moral problems and the former on
metaphysical problems. In Dostoevsky’s novels the question is
propounded with such intensity that it can only invite extreme
solutions. Existence is illusory or it is eternal. If Dostoevsky were
satisfied with this inquiry, he would be a philosopher. But he
illustrates the consequences that such intellectual pastimes may
have in a man’s life, and in this regard he is an artist. Among those
consequences, his attention is arrested particularly by the last one,
which he himself calls logical suicide in his Diary of a Writer. In
the installments for December 1876, indeed, he imagines the
reasoning of “logical suicide.” Convinced that human existence is
an utter absurdity for anyone without faith in immortality, the
desperate man comes to the following conclusions:
“Since in reply to my questions about happiness, I am told,
through the intermediary of my consciousness, that I cannot be
happy except in harmony with the great all, which I cannot
conceive and shall never be in a position to conceive, it is evident
“Since, finally, in this connection, I assume both the role of the
plaintiff and that of the defendant, of the accused and of the judge,
and since I consider this comedy perpetrated by nature altogether
stupid, and since I even deem it humiliating for me to deign to play
it...”
“In my indisputable capacity of plaintiff and defendant, of
judge and accused, I condemn that nature which, with such
impudent nerve, brought me into being in order to suffer—I
condemn it to be annihilated with me.”
There remains a little humor in that position. This suicide kills
himself because, on the metaphysical plane, he is vexed. In a
certain sense he is taking his revenge. This is his way of proving
that he “will not be had.” It is known, however, that the same
theme is embodied, but with the most wonderful generality, in
Kirilov of The Possessed likewise an advocate of logical suicide.
Kirilov the engineer declares somewhere that he wants to take his
own life because it “is his idea.” Obviously the word must be taken
in its proper sense. It is for an idea, a thought, that he is getting
ready for death. This is the superior suicide. Progressively, in a
series of scenes in which Kirilov’s mask is gradually illuminated,
the fatal thought driving him is revealed to us. The engineer, in
fact, goes back to the arguments of the Diary. He feels that God is
necessary and that he must exist. But he knows that he does not
and cannot exist. “Why do you not realize,” he exclaims, “that this
is sufficient reason for killing oneself?” That attitude involves
likewise for him some of the absurd consequences. Through
indifference he accepts letting his suicide be used to the advantage
of a cause he despises. “I decided last night that I didn’t care.” And
finally he prepares his deed with a mixed feeling of revolt and
freedom. “I shall kill myself in order to assert my insubordination,
my new and dreadful liberty.” It is no longer a question of revenge,
but of revolt. Kirilov is consequently an absurd character—yet
with this essential reservation: he kills himself. But he himself
explains this contradiction, and in such a way that at the same time
he reveals the absurd secret in all its purity. In truth, he adds to his
fatal logic an extraordinary ambition which gives the character its
full perspective: he wants to kill himself to become god.
The reasoning is classic in its clarity. If God does not exist,
Kirilov is god. If God does not exist, Kirilov must kill himself.
Kirilov must therefore kill himself to become god. That logic is
absurd, but it is what is needed. The interesting thing, however, is
to give a meaning to that divinity brought to earth. That amounts to
clarifying the premise: “If God does not exist, I am god,” which
still remains rather obscure. It is important to note at the outset that
the man who flaunts that mad claim is indeed of this world. He
performs his gymnastics every morning to preserve his health. He
is stirred by the joy of Chatov recovering his wife. On a sheet of
paper to be found after his death he wants to draw a face sticking
out his tongue at “them.” He is childish and irascible, passionate,
methodical, and sensitive. Of the superman he has nothing but the
logic and the obsession, whereas of man he has the whole
catalogue. Yet it is he who speaks calmly of his divinity. He is not
mad, or else Dostoevsky is. Consequently it is not a
megalomaniac’s illusion that excites him. And taking the words in
their specific sense would, in this instance, be ridiculous.
Kirilov himself helps us to understand. In reply to a question
from Stavrogin, he makes clear that he is not talking of a god-man.
It might be thought that this springs from concern to distinguish
himself from Christ. But in reality it is a matter of annexing Christ.
Kirilov in fact fancies for a moment that Jesus at his death did not
find himself in Paradise. He found out then that his torture had
been useless. “The laws of nature,” says the engineer, “made
Christ live in the midst of falsehood and die for a falsehood.”
Solely in this sense Jesus indeed personifies the whole human
drama. He is the complete man, being the one who realized the
most absurd condition. He is not the God-man but the man-god.
And, like him, each of us can be crucified and victimized—and is
to a certain degree.
The divinity in question is therefore altogether terrestrial. “For
three years,” says Kirilov, “I sought the attribute of my divinity
and I have found it. The attribute of my divinity is independence.”
Now can be seen the meaning of Kirilov’s premise: “If God does
not exist, I am god.” To become god is merely to be free on this
earth, not to serve an immortal being. Above all, of course, it is
drawing all the inferences from that painful independence. If God
exists, all depends on him and we can do nothing against his will.
If he does not exist, everything depends on us. For Kirilov, as for
Nietzsche, to kill God is to become god oneself; it is to realize on
this earth the eternal life of which the Gospel speaks.^ But if this
metaphysical crime is enough for man’s fulfillment, why add
suicide? Why kill oneself and leave this world after having won
freedom? That is contradictory. Kirilov is well aware of this, for he
adds: “If you feel that, you are a tsar and, far from killing yourself,
you will live covered with glory.” But men in general do not kn ow
it. They do not feel “that.” As in the time of Prometheus, they
entertain blind hopes.^ They need to be shown the way and
cannot do without preaching. Consequently, Kirilov must kill
himself out of love for humanity. He must show his brothers a
royal and difficult path on which he will be the first. It is a
pedagogical suicide. Kirilov sacrifices himself, then. But if he is
crucified, he will not be victimized. He remains the man-god,
convinced of a death without future, imbued with evangelical
melancholy. “I,” he says, “am unhappy because I am obliged to
assert my freedom.”
But once he is dead and men are at last enlightened, this earth
will be peopled with tsars and lighted up with human glory.
Kirilov’s pistol shot will be the signal for the last revolution. Thus,
it is not despair that urges him to death, but love of his neighbor
for his own sake. Before terminating in blood an indescribable
spiritual adventure, Kirilov makes a remark as old as human
suffering: “All is well.”
This theme of suicide in Dostoevsky, then, is indeed an absurd
theme. Let us merely note before going on that Kirilov reappears in
other characters who themselves set in motion additional absurd
themes. Stavrogin and Ivan Karamazov try out the absurd truths in
practical life. They are the ones liberated by Kirilov’s death. They
try their skill at being tsars. Stavrogin leads an “ironic” life, and it
is well known in what regard. He arouses hatred around him. And
yet the key to the character is found in his farewell letter: “I have
not been able to detest anything.” He is a tsar in indifference. Ivan
is likewise by refusing to surrender the royal powers of the mind.
To those who, like his brother, prove by their lives that it is
essential to humiliate oneself in order to believe, he might reply
that the condition is shameful. His key word is: “Everything is
permitted,” with the appropriate shade of melancholy. Of course,
like Nietzsche, the most famous of God’s assassins, he ends in
madness. But this is a risk worth running, and, faced with such
tragic ends, the essential impulse of the absurd mind is to ask:
“What does that prove?”
* * *
Thus the novels, like the Diary, propound the absurd question.
They establish logic unto death, exaltation, “dreadful” freedom, the
glory of the tsars become human. All is well, everything is
permitted, and nothing is hateful—these are absurd judgments. But
what an amazing creation in which those creatures of fire and ice
seem so familiar to us. The passionate world of indifference that
rumbles in their hearts does not seem at all monstrous to us. We
recognize in it our everyday anxieties. And probably no one so
much as Dostoevsky has managed to give the absurd world such
familiar and tormenting charms.
Yet what is his conclusion? Two quotations will show the
complete metaphysical reversal that leads the writer to other
revelations. The argument of the one who commits logical suicide
having provoked protests from the critics, Dostoevsky in the
following installments of the Diary amplifies his position and
concludes thus: “If faith in immortality is so necessary to the
human being (that without it he comes to the point of killing
himself), it must therefore be the normal state of humanity. Since
this is the case, the immortality of the human soul exists without
any doubt.” Then again in the last pages of his last novel, at the
conclusion of that gigantic combat with God, some children ask
Aliocha: “Karamazov, is it true what religion says, that we shall
rise from the dead, that we shall see one another again?” And
Aliocha answers: “Certainly, we shall see one another again, we
shall joyfully tell one another everything that has happened.”
Thus Kirilov, Stavrogin, and Ivan are defeated. The Brothers
Karamazov replies to The Possessed. And it is indeed a conclusion.
Aliocha’s case is not ambiguous, as is that of Prince Muichkin. Ill,
the latter lives in a perpetual present, tinged with smiles and
indifference, and that blissful state might be the eternal life of
which the Prince speaks. On the contrary, Aliocha clearly says:
“We shall meet again.” There is no longer any question of suicide
and of madness. What is the use, for anyone who is sure of
immortality and of its joys? Man exchanges his divinity for
happiness. “We shall joyfully tell one another everything that has
happened.” Thus again Kirilov’s pistol rang out somewhere in
Russia, but the world continued to cherish its blind hopes. Men did
not understand “that.”
Consequently, it is not an absurd novelist addressing us, but an
existential novelist. Here, too, the leap is touching and gives its
nobility to the art that inspires it. It is a stirring acquiescence,
riddled with doubts, uncertain and ardent. Speaking of The
Brothers Karamazov, Dostoevsky wrote: “The chief question that
will be pursued throughout this book is the very one from which I
have suffered consciously or unconsciously all life long: the
existence of God.” It is hard to believe that a novel sufficed to
transform into joyful certainty the suffering of a lifetime. One
commentator^ correctly pointed out that Dostoevsky is on Ivan’s
side and that the affirmative chapters took three months of effort
whereas what he called “the blasphemies” were written in three
weeks in a state of excitement. There is not one of his characters
who does not have that thorn in the flesh, who does not aggravate
it or seek a remedy for it in sensation or immortality.^ In any
case, let us remain with this doubt. Here is a work which, in a
chiaroscuro more gripping than the light of day, permits us to seize
man’s struggle against his hopes. Having reached the end, the
creator makes his choice against his characters. That contradiction
thus allows us to make a distinction. It is not an absurd work that is
involved here, but a work that propounds the absurd problem.
Dostoevsky’s reply is humiliation, “shame” according to
Stavrogin. An absurd work, on the contrary, does not provide a
reply; that is the whole difference. Let us note this carefully in
conclusion: what contradicts the absurd in that work is not its
Christian character, but rather its announcing a future life. It is
possible to be Christian and absurd. There are examples of
Christians who do not believe in a future life. In regard to the work
of art, it should therefore be possible to define one of the directions
of the absurd analysis that could have been anticipated in the
preceding pages. It leads to propounding “the absurdity of the
Gospel.” It throws light upon this idea, fertile in repercussions, that
convictions do not prevent incredulity. On the contrary, it is easy
to see that the author of The Possessed, familiar with these paths,
in conclusion took a quite different way. The surprising reply of
the creator to his characters, of Do-stoevsky to Kirilov, can indeed
be summed up thus: existence is illusory and it is eternal.
Ephemeral Creation
At this point I perceive, therefore, that hope cannot be eluded
forever and that it can beset even those who wanted to be free of it.
This is the interest I find in the works discussed up to this point. I
could, at least in the realm of creation, list some truly absurd
works.^ But everything must have a beginning. The object of this
quest is a certain fidelity. The Church has been so harsh with
heretics only because she deemed that there is no worse enemy
than a child who has gone astray. But the record of Gnostic
effronteries and the persistence of Manichean currents have
contributed more to the construction of orthodox dogma than all
the prayers. With due allowance, the same is true of the absurd.
One recognizes one’s course by discovering the paths that stray
from it. At the very conclusion of the absurd reasoning, in one of
the attitudes dictated by its logic, it is not a matter of indifference
to find hope coming back in under one of its most touching guises.
That shows the difficulty of the absurd ascesis. Above all, it shows
the necessity of unfailing alertness and thus confirms the general
plan of this essay.
But if it is still too early to list absurd works, at least a
conclusion can be reached as to the creative attitude, one of those
which can complete absurd existence. Art can never be so well
served as by a negative thought. Its dark and humiliated
proceedings are as necessary to the understanding of a great work
as black is to white. To work and create “for nothing,” to sculpture
in clay, to know that one’s creation has no future, to see one’s
work destroyed in a day while being aware that fundamentally this
has no more importance than building for centuries—this is the
difficult wisdom that absurd thought sanctions. Performing these
two tasks simultaneously, negating on the one hand and
magnifying on the other, is the way open to the absurd creator. He
must give the void its colors.
This leads to a special conception of the work of art. Too often
the work of a creator is looked upon as a series of isolated
testimonies. Thus, artist and man of letters are confused. A
profound thought is in a constant state of becoming; it adopts the
experience of a life and assumes its shape, likewise, a man’s sole
creation is strengthened in its successive and multiple aspects: his
works. One after another, they complement one an-other, correct or
overtake one another, contradict one another too. If something
brings creation to an end, it is not the victorious and illusory cry of
the blinded artist: “I have said everything,” but the death of the
creator which closes his experience and the book of his genius.
That effort, that superhuman consciousness are not necessarily
apparent to the reader. There is no mystery in human creation. Will
performs this miracle. But at least there is no true creation without
a secret. To be sure, a succession of works can be but a series of
approximations of the same thought. But it is possible to conceive
of another type of creator proceeding by juxtaposition. Their works
may seem to be devoid of interrelations. To a certain degree, they
are contradictory.
But viewed all together, they resume their natural grouping.
From death, for instance, they derive their definitive significance.
They receive their most obvious light from the very life of their
author. At the moment of death, the succession of his works is but
a collection of failures. But if those failures all have the same
resonance, the creator has managed to repeat the image of his own
condition, to make the air echo with the sterile secret he possesses.
The effort to dominate is considerable here. But human
intelligence is up to much more. It will merely indicate clearly the
voluntary aspect of creation. Elsewhere I have brought out the fact
that human will had no other purpose than to maintain awareness.
But that could not do without discipline. Of all the schools of
patience and lucidity, creation is the most effective. It is also the
staggering evidence of man’s sole dignity: the dogged revolt
against his condition, perseverance in an effort considered sterile.
It calls for a daily effort, self-mastery, a precise estimate of the
limits of truth, measure, and strength. It constitutes an ascesis. All
that “for nothing,” in order to repeat and mark time. But perhaps
the great work of art has less importance in itself than in the ordeal
it demands of a man and the opportunity it provides him of
overcoming his phantoms and approaching a little closer to his
naked reality.
H= *
Let there be no mistake in aesthetics. It is not patient inquiry,
the unceasing, sterile illustration of a thesis that I am calling for
here. Quite the contrary, if I have made myself clearly understood.
The thesis-novel, the work that proves, the most hateful of all, is
the one that most often is inspired by a smug thought. You
demonstrate the truth you feel sure of possessing. But those are
ideas one launches, and ideas are the contrary of thought. Those
creators are philosophers, ashamed of themselves. Those I am
speaking of or whom I imagine are, on the contrary, lucid thinkers.
At a certain point where thought turns back on itself, they raise up
the images of their works like the obvious symbols of a limited,
mortal, and rebellious thought.
They perhaps prove something. But those proofs are ones that
the novelists provide for themselves rather than for the world in
general. The essential is that the novelists should triumph in the
concrete and that this constitute their nobility. This wholly carnal
triumph has been prepared for them by a thought in which abstract
powers have been humiliated. When they are completely so, at the
same time the flesh makes the creation shine forth in all its absurd
luster. After all, ironic philosophies produce passionate works.
Any thought that abandons unity glorifies diversity. And
diversity is the home of art. The only thought to liberate the mind
is that which leaves it alone, certain of its limits and of its
impending end. No doctrine tempts it. It awaits the ripening of the
work and of life. Detached from it, the work will once more give a
barely muffled voice to a soul Forever freed from hope. Or it will
give voice to nothing if the creator, tired of his activity, intends to
turn away. That is equivalent.
Thus, I ask of absurd creation what I required from thought—
revolt, freedom, and diversity. Later on it will manifest its utter
futility. In that daily effort in which intelligence and passion
mingle and delight each other, the absurd man discovers a
discipline that will make up the greatest of his strengths. The
required diligence, the doggedness and lucidity thus resemble the
conqueror’s attitude. To create is likewise to give a shape to one’s
fate. For all these characters, their work defines them at least as
much as it is defined by them. The actor taught us this: there is no
frontier between being and appearing.
Let me repeat. None of all this has any real meaning. On the
way to that liberty, there is still a progress to be made. The final
effort for these related minds, creator or conqueror, is to manage to
free themselves also from their undertakings: succeed in granting
that the very work, whether it be conquest, love, or creation, may
well not be; consummate thus the utter futility of any individual
life. Indeed, that gives them more freedom in the realization of that
work, just as becoming aware of the absurdity of life authorized
them to plunge into it with every excess.
All that remains is a fate whose outcome alone is fatal. Outside
of that single fatality of death, everything, joy or happiness, is
liberty. A world remains of which man is the sole master. What
bound him was the illusion of another world. The outcome of his
thought, ceasing to be renunciatory, flowers in images. It frolics—
in myths, to be sure, but myths with no other depth than that of
human suffering and, like it, inexhaustible. Not the divine fable
that amuses and blinds, but the terrestrial face, gesture, and drama
in which are summed up a difficult wisdom and an ephemeral
passion.
The Myth Of Sisyphus
The gods had condemned Sisyphus to ceaselessly rolling a rock
to the top of a mountain, whence the stone would fall back of its
own weight. They had thought with some reason that there is no
more dreadful punishment than futile and hopeless labor.
If one believes Homer, Sisyphus was the wisest and most
prudent of mortals. According to another tradition, however, he
was disposed to practice the profession of highwayman. I see no
contradiction in this. Opinions differ as to the reasons why he
became the futile laborer of the underworld. To begin with, he is
accused of a certain levity in regard to the gods. He stole their
secrets. AEgina, the daughter of AEsopus, was carried off by
Jupiter. The father was shocked by that disappearance and
complained to Sisyphus. He, who knew of the abduction, offered
to tell about it on condition that AEsopus would give water to the
citadel of Corinth. To the celestial thunderbolts he preferred the
benediction of water. He was punished for this in the underworld.
Homer tells us also that Sisyphus had put Death in chains. Pluto
could not endure the sight of his deserted, silent empire. He
dispatched the god of war, who liberated Death from the hands of
her conqueror.
It is said also that Sisyphus, being near to death, rashly wanted
to test his wife’s love. He ordered her to cast his unburied body
into the middle of the public square. Sisyphus woke up in the
underworld. And there, annoyed by an obedience so contrary to
human love, he obtained from Pluto permission to return to earth in
order to chastise his wife. But when he had seen again the face of
this world, enjoyed water and sun, warm stones and the sea, he no
longer wanted to go back to the infernal darkness. Recalls, signs of
anger, warnings were of no avail. Many years more he lived facing
the curve of the gulf, the sparkling sea, and the smiles of earth. A
decree of the gods was necessary. Mercury came and seized the
impudent man by the collar and, snatching him from his joys, led
him forcibly back to the underworld, where his rock was ready for
him.
You have already grasped that Sisyphus is the absurd hero. He
is, as much through his passions as through his torture. His scorn
of the gods, his hatred of death, and his passion for life won him
that unspeakable penalty in which the whole being is exerted
toward accomplishing nothing. This is the price that must be paid
for the passions of this earth. Nothing is told us about Sisyphus in
the underworld. Myths are made for the imagination to breathe life
into them. As for this myth, one sees merely the whole effort of a
body straining to raise the huge stone, to roll it and push it up a
slope a hundred times over; one sees the face screwed up, the
cheek tight against the stone, the shoulder bracing the clay-covered
mass, the foot wedging it, the fresh start with arms outstretched,
the wholly human security of two earth-clotted hands. At the very
end of his long effort measured by skyless space and time without
depth, the purpose is achieved. Then Sisyphus watches the stone
rush down in a few moments toward that lower world whence he
will have to push it up again toward the summit. He goes back
down to the plain.
It is during that return, that pause, that Sisyphus interests me. A
face that toils so close to stones is already stone itself! I see that
man going back down with a heavy yet measured step toward the
torment of which he will never know the end. That hour like a
breathing-space which returns as surely as his suffering, that is the
hour of consciousness. At each of those moments when he leaves
the heights and gradually sinks toward the lairs of the gods, he is
superior to his fate. He is stronger than his rock.
If this myth is tragic, that is because its hero is conscious.
Where would his torture be, indeed, if at every step the hope of
succeeding upheld him? The workman of today works every day in
his life at the same tasks, and this fate is no less absurd. But it is
tragic only at the rare moments when it becomes conscious.
Sisyphus, proletarian of the gods, powerless and rebellious, knows
the whole extent of his wretched condition: it is what he thi nk s of
during his descent. The lucidity that was to constitute his torture at
the same time crowns his victory. There is no fate that cannot be
surmounted by scorn.
* * *
If the descent is thus sometimes performed in sorrow, it can
also take place in joy. This word is not too much. Again I fancy
Sisyphus returning toward his rock, and the sorrow was in the
beginning. When the images of earth cling too tightly to memory,
when the call of happiness becomes too insistent, it happens that
melancholy rises in man’s heart: this is the rock’s victory, this is
the rock itself. The boundless grief is too heavy to bear. These are
our nights of Gethsemane. But crushing truths perish from being
acknowledged. Thus, CEdipus at the outset obeys fate without
knowing it. But from the moment he knows, his tragedy begins.
Yet at the same moment, blind and desperate, he realizes that the
only bond linking him to the world is the cool hand of a girl. Then
a tremendous remark rings out: “Despite so many ordeals, my
advanced age and the nobility of my soul make me conclude that
all is well.” Sophocles’ CEdipus, like Dostoevsky’s Kirilov, thus
gives the recipe for the absurd victory. Ancient wisdom confirms
modern heroism.
One does not discover the absurd without being tempted to
write a manual of happiness. “What! by such narrow ways—?”
There is but one world, however. Happiness and the absurd are two
sons of the same earth. They are inseparable. It would be a mistake
to say that happiness necessarily springs from the absurd
discovery. It happens as well that the feeling of the absurd springs
from happiness. “I conclude that all is well,” says CEdipus, and
that remark is sacred. It echoes in the wild and limited universe of
man. It teaches that all is not, has not been, exhausted. It drives out
of this world a god who had come into it with dissatisfaction and a
preference for futile sufferings. It makes of fate a human matter,
which must be settled among men.
All Sisyphus’ silent joy is contained therein. His fate belongs
to him. His rock is his thing. Likewise, the absurd man, when he
contemplates his tonnent, silences all the idols. In the universe
suddenly restored to its silence, the myriad wondering little voices
of the earth rise up. Unconscious, secret calls, invitations from all
the faces, they are the necessary reverse and price of victory. There
is no sun without shadow, and it is es-sential to know the night.
The absurd man says yes and his effort will henceforth be
unceasing. If there is a personal fate, there is no higher destiny, or
at least there is but one which he concludes is inevitable and
despicable. For the rest, he knows himself to be the master of his
days. At that subtle moment when man glances backward over his
life, Sisyphus returning toward his rock, in that slight pivoting he
contemplates that series of unrelated actions which becomes his
fate, created by him, combined under his memory’s eye and soon
sealed by his death. Thus, convinced of the wholly human origin of
all that is human, a blind man eager to see who knows that the
night has no end, he is still on the go. The rock is still rolling.
I leave Sisyphus at the foot of the mountain! One always finds
one’s burden again. But Sisyphus teaches the higher fidelity that
negates the gods and raises rocks. He too concludes that all is well.
This universe henceforth without a master seems to him neither
sterile nor futile. Each atom of that stone, each mineral flake of
that night-filled mountain, in itself forms a world. The struggle
itself toward the heights is enough to fill a man’s heart. One must
imagine Sisyphus happy.