For ages they had been without lives of their own. The whole of
their being was open to the world and nothing divided them
from the rest of creation. How long they had thus flourished
none of them knew. Then something began to change. It happened over unremembered generations. The signs of a revision
without forewarning were being writ ever more deeply into
them. As their species moved forward, they began crossing
boundaries whose very existence they never imagined. After
nightfall, they looked up at a sky filled with stars and felt themselves small and fragile in the vastness. Soon they began to see
everything in a way they never had in older times. When they
found one of their own lying still and stiff, they now stood
around the body as if there were something they should do that
they had never done before. It was then they began to take bodies that were still and stiff to distant places so they could not find
their way back to them. But even after they had done this, some
within their group did see those bodies again, often standing silent in the moonlight or loitering sad-faced just beyond the glow
of a fire. Everything changed once they had lives of their own
and knew they had lives of their own. It even became impossible
for them to believe things had ever been any other way. They
were masters of their movements now, as it seemed, and never
had there been anything like them. The epoch had passed when
the whole of their being was open to the world and nothing di-
20 
vided them from the rest of creation. Something had happened.
They did not know what it was, but they did know it as that
which should not be. And something needed to be done if they
were to flourish as they once had, if the very ground beneath
their feet were not to fall out from under them. For ages they
had been without lives of their own. Now that they had such
lives there was no turning back. The whole of their being was
closed to the world, and they had been divided from the rest of
creation. Nothing could be done about that, having as they did
lives of their own. But something would have to be done if they
were to live with that which should not be. And over time they
discovered what could be done-what would have to be doneso that they could live the lives that were now theirs to live. This
would not revive among them the way things had once been
done in older times; it would only be the best they could do.1
Ante-Mortem
For thousands of years a debate has been going on in the shadowy
background of human affairs. The issue to be resolved: "What
should we say about being alive?" Overwhelmingly, people have
said, "Being alive is all right." More thoughtful persons have added,
"Especially when you consider the alternative," disclosing a jocularity as puzzling as it is macabre, since the alternative is here implied to be both disagreeable and, upon consideration, capable of
making being alive seem more agreeable than it alternatively
would, as if the alternative were only a possibility that may or
may not come to pass, like getting the flu, rather than a looming
inevitability. And yet this covertly portentous remark is perfectly
well tolerated by anyone who says that being alive is all right.
These individuals stand on one side of the debate. On the other
side is an imperceptible minority of disputants. Their response to
the question of what we should say about being alive will be neither positive nor equivocal. They may even fulminate about how 
 21
objectionable it is to be alive, or spout off that to be alive is to inhabit a nightmare without hope of awakening to a natural world,
to have our bodies embedded neck-deep in a quagmire of dread,
to live as shut-ins in a house of horrors from which nobody gets
out alive, and so on. Now, there are really no incisive answers as
to why anyone thinks or feels one way and not another. The most
we can say is that the first group of people is composed of optimists, although they may not think of themselves as such, while
the contending group, that imperceptible minority, is composed
of pessimists. The latter know who they are. But which group is
in the right-the existentially harrowed pessimists or the lifeembracing optimists-will never be resolved.
If the most contemplative individuals are sometimes dubious about the value of existence, they do not often publicize
their doubts but align themselves with the optimist in the
street, tacitly declaiming, in more erudite terms, "Being alive is
all right." The butcher, the baker, and the crushing majority of
philosophers all agree on one thing: Human life is a good thing,
and we should keep our species going for as long as we can. To
tout the rival side of the issue is asking for grief. But some people seem born to bellyache that being alive is not all right.
Should they vent this posture in philosophical or literary works,
they may do so without anxiety that their efforts will have an
excess of admirers. Notable among such efforts is "The Last
Messiah" (1933)1 an essay written by the Norwegian philosopher and man of letters Peter Wessel Zapffe (1899-1990) . In
this work, which to date has been twice translated into English,2
Zapffe elucidated why he saw human existence as a tragedy.
Before discussing Zapffe's elucidation of human existence as a
tragedy, however, it may be useful to muse upon a few facts
whose relevance will become manifest down the line. As some
may know, there exist readers who treasure philosophical and 
22 
literary works of a pessimistic, nihilistic, or defeatist nature as
indispensable to their existence, hyperbolically speaking. Contrary by temperament, these persons are sorely aware that nothing indispensable to their existence, hyperbolically or literally
speaking, must make its way into their lives, as if by natural
birthright. They do not think anything indispensable to anyone's
existence may be claimed as a natural birthright, since the birthrights we toss about are all lies fabricated to a purpose, as any
student of humanity can verify. For those who have given
thought to this matter, the only rights we may exercise are
these: to seek the survival of our individual bodies, to create
more bodies like our own, and to perish from corruption or
mortal trauma. This is presuming that one has been brought to
term and has made it to the age of being reproductively ready,
neither being a natural birthright. Stringently considered, then,
our only natural birthright is a right to die. No other right has
ever been allocated to anyone except as a fabrication, whether
in modern times or days past.3 The divine right of kings may
now be acknowledged as a fabrication, a falsified permit for
prideful dementia and impulsive mayhem. The inalienable rights
of certain people, on the other hand, seemingly remain current:
somehow we believe they are not fabrications because hallowed
documents declare they are real. Miserly or munificent as a
given right may appear, it denotes no more than the right of way
warranted by a traffic light, which does not mean you have the
right to drive free of vehicular misadventures. Ask any paramedic as your dead body is taken away to the nearest hospital.
Wide-Awake
Our want of any natural birthright-except to die, in most
cases without assistance--is not a matter of tragedy, but only
one of truth. Coming at last to the pith of Zapffe's thought as it
is contained in "The Last Messiah," what the Norwegian phi-
 23
losopher saw as the tragedy of human existence had its beginnings when at some stage in our evolution we acquired "a
damning surplus of consciousness." (Indulgence is begged in advance for the present work's profuse entreaties for assent, or at
least suspension of disbelief, in this matter.) Naturally, it must
be owned that there are quarrels among cognitive psychologists,
philosophers of mind, and neuroscientists about what consciousness is. The fact that this question has been around since
at least the time of the ancient Greeks and early Buddhists suggests there is an assumption of consciousness in the human species and that consciousness has had an effect on the way we
exist. For Zapffe, the effect was
A breach in the very unity of life, a biological paradox, an abomination, an absurdity, an exaggeration of disastrous nature. Life had
overshot its target, blowing itself apart. A species had been armed
too heavily-by spirit made almighty without, but equally a menace to its own well-being. Its weapon was like a sword without hilt
or plate, a two-edged blade cleaving everything; but he who is to
wield it must grasp the blade and turn one edge toward himself.
Despite his new eyes, man was still rooted in matter, his soul
spun into it and subordinated to its blind laws. And yet he could
see matter as a stranger, compare himself to all phenomena, see
through and locate his vital processes. He comes to nature as an
unbidden guest, in vain extending his arms to beg conciliation
with his maker: Nature answers no more; it performed a miracle
with man, but later did not know him. He has lost his right of
residence in the universe, has eaten from the Tree of Knowledge
and been expelled from Paradise. He is mighty in the near world,
but curses his might as purchased with his harmony of soul, his
innocence, his inner peace in life's embrace.
Could there be anything to this pessimistic verbiage, this tirade
against the evolution of consciousness? Millennia had passed
without much discussion one way or the other on the subject,
at least in polite society. Then suddenly this barrage from an
obscure Norwegian philosopher. What is one to say? For con-

trast, here are some excerpts from an online interview with the
eminent British multidisciplinary thinker Nicholas Humphrey
("A Self Worth Having: A Talk with Nicolas Humphrey,"
2003):
Consciousness-phenomenal experience-seems in many ways
too good to be true. The way we experience the world seems unnecessarily beautiful, unnecessarily rich and strange ....
Phenomenal experience, surely, can and does provide the basis
for creating a self worth having. And just see what becomes possible-even natural--once this new self is in place1 As subjects of
something so mysterious and strange, we humans gain new confidence and interest in our own survival, a new interest in other
people too. We begin to be interested in the future, in immortality, and in all sorts of issues to do with ... how far consciousness
extends around us ....
[T]he more I try to make sense of it, the more I come back to
the fact that we've evolved to regard consciousness as a wonderfully good thing in its own right-which could just be because
consciousness is a wonderfully good thing in its own right)
Could there be anything to this optimistic verbiage in which
consciousness is not a "breach in the very unity of life, a biological paradox, an abomination, an absurdity, an exaggeration
of disastrous nature" but something that is "unnecessarily beautiful, unnecessarily rich and strange" and "a wonderfully good
thing in its own right," something that makes human existence
an unbelievably desirable adventure? Think about it-a British
thinker thinks so well of the evolution of consciousness that he
cannot contain his gratitude for this turn of events. What is one
to say? Both Humphrey and Zapffe are equally passionate about
what they have to say, which is not to say that they have said
anything credible. Whether you think consciousness to be a
benefit or a horror, this is only what you think-and nothing
else. But even though you cannot demonstrate the truth of
what you think, you can at least put it on show and see what
the audience thinks. 

Brainwork
Over the centuries, assorted theories about the nature and
workings of consciousness have been put forth. The theory
Zapffe implicitly accepted is this: Consciousness is connected to
the human brain in a way that makes the world appear to us as
it appears and makes us appear to ourselves as we appear-that
is, as "selves" or a "persons" strung together by memories, sensations, emotions, and so on. No one knows exactly how the consciousness-brain connection is made, but all evidence supports
the non-dualistic theory that the brain is the source of consciousness and the only source of consciousness. Zapffe accepted consciousness as a given and moved on from there, since
he was not interested in the debates surrounding this phenomenon as such but only in the way it determines the nature
of our species. This was enough for his purposes, which were
wholly existential and careless of seeking technical explanations
for the workings of consciousness. Anyway, how consciousness
"happened," since it was not always present in our species, remains as much a mystery in our time as it was in Zapffe's, just
as the process of how life came about from materials that were
not living remains a mystery. First there was no life, and then
there was life--nature, as it came to be called. As nature proliferated into more complex and various forms, human organisms
eventually entered the world as part of this process. After a
time, consciousness happened for these organisms (and a few
others at
.
much lower amplitudes) . And it kept on gaining
steam as we evolved. On this all theorists of consciousness
agree. Billions of years after earth made a jump from being lifeless to having life, human beings made a jump from not being
conscious, or very much conscious, to being conscious enough
to esteem or condemn this phenomenon. No one knows either
how the jump was made or how long it took, although there 

are theories about both, as there are theories about all mutations from one state to another.
"The mutations must be considered blind," Zapffe wrote.
"They work, are thrown forth, without any contact of interest
with their environment." As mentioned, how the mutation of
consciousness originated was of no concern to Zapffe, who focused entirely on demonstrating the tragic effect of this aptitude.
Such projects are typical among pessimistic philosophers. Nonpessimistic philosophers either have an impartial attitude about
consciousness or, like Nicholas Humphrey, think of it as a marvelous endowment. When non-pessimistic philosophers even notice the pessimist's attitude, they reject it. With the world on
their side in the conviction that being alive is all right, nonpessimists are not disposed to musing that human existence is a
wholesale tragedy. They only argue the fine points of whatever it
is about human existence that grabs their attention, which may
include the tragic but not so much that they lose their commitment to the proposition that being alive is all right. And they can
do this until the day they die, which is all right by them.
Mutation
Established: Consciousness is not often viewed as being an instrument of tragedy in human life. But to Zapffe, consciousness
would long past have proved fatal for human beings if we did
not do something about it. "Why," Zapffe asked, "has mankind
not long ago gone extinct during great epidemics of madness?
Why do only a fairly minor number of individuals perish because they fail to endure the strain of living--because cognition
gives them more than they can carry?" Zapffe's answer: "Most
people learn to save themselves by artificially limiting the content of consciousness."
From an evolutionary viewpoint, in Zapffe's observation,
consciousness was a blunder that required corrections for its ef-
 27
fects. It was an adventitious outgrowth that made us into a race
of contradictory beings-uncanny things that have nothing to do
with the rest of creation. Because of consciousness, parent of all
horrors, we became susceptible to thoughts that were startling
and dreadful to us, thoughts that have never been equitably balanced by those that are collected and reassuring. Our minds now
began dredging up horrors, flagrantly joyless possibilities, enough
of them to make us drop to the ground in paroxysms of selfsoiling consternation should they go untrammeled. This potentiality necessitated that certain defense mechanisms be put to use
to keep us balanced on the knife-edge of vitality as a species.
While a modicum of consciousness may have had survivalist
properties during an immemorial chapter of our evolution-so
one theory goes-this faculty soon enough became a seditious
agent working against us. As Zapffe concluded, we need to hamper our consciousness for all we are worth or it will impose upon
us a too clear vision of what we do not want to see, which, as the
Norwegian philosopher saw it, along with every other pessimist,
is "the brotherhood of suffering between everything alive."
Whether or not one agrees that there is a "brotherhood of suffering between everything alive," we can all agree that human beings
are the only organisms that can have such a conception of existence, or any conception period. That we can conceive of the
phenomenon of suffering, our own as well as that of other organisms, is a property unique to us as a dangerously conscious species. We know there is suffering, and we do take action against it,
which includes downplaying it by "artificially limiting the content
of consciousness." Between taking action against and downplaying
suffering, mainly the latter, most of us do not worry that it has
overly sullied our existence.
As a fact, we cannot give suffering precedence in either our
individual or collective lives. We have to get on with things, and
those who give precedence to suffering will be left behind. 

They fetter us with their sniveling. We have someplace to go
and must believe we can get there, wherever that may be. And
to conceive that there is a "brotherhood of suffering between
everything alive" would disable us from getting anywhere. We
are preoccupied with the good life, and step by step are working toward a better life. What we do, as a conscious species, is
set markers for ourselves. Once we reach one marker, we advance to the next-as if we were playing a board game we
think will never end, despite the fact that it will, like it or not.
And if you are too conscious of not liking it, then you may conceive of yourself as a biological paradox that cannot live with
its consciousness and cannot live without it. And in so living
and not living, you take your place with the undead and the
human puppet.
Undoing I
For the rest of the earth's organisms, existence is relatively uncomplicated. Their lives are about three things: survival, reproduction, death-and nothing else. But we know too much to
content ourselves with surviving, reproducing, dying-and nothing else. We know we are alive and know we will die. We also
know we will suffer during our lives before suffering-slowly or
quickly-as we draw near to death. This is the knowledge we
"enjoy" as the most intelligent organisms to gush from the womb
of nature. And being so, we feel shortchanged if there is nothing
else for us than to survive, reproduce, and die. We want there to
be more to it than that, or to think there is. This is the tragedy:
Consciousness has forced us into the paradoxical position of
striving to be unself-conscious of what we are--hunks of spoiling flesh on disintegrating bones.
Nonhuman occupants of this planet are unaware of death.
But we are susceptible to startling and dreadful thoughts, and
we need some fabulous illusions to take our minds off them. 
 29
For us, then, life is a confidence trick we must run on ourselves,
hoping we do not catch on to any monkey business that would
leave us stripped of our defense mechanisms and standing stark
naked before the silent, staring void. To end this self-deception,
to free our species of the paradoxical imperative to be and not
to be conscious, our backs breaking by degrees upon a wheel of
lies, we must cease reproducing. Nothing less will do, per Zapffe,
although in "The Last Messiah" the character after whom the
essay is named does all the talking about human extinction.
Elsewhere Zapffe speaks for himself on the subject.
The sooner humanity dares to harmonize itself with its biological
predicament, the better. And this means to willingly withdraw in
contempt for its worldly terms, j ust as the heat-craving species
went extinct when temperatures dropped. To us, it is the moral
climate of the cosmos that is intolerable, and a two-child policy
could make our discontinuance a pain-free one. Yet instead we
are expanding and succeeding everywhere, as necessity has taught
us to mutilate the formula in our hearts. Perhaps the most unreasonable effect of such invigorating vulgarization is the doctrine
that the individual "has a duty" to suffer nameless agony and a terrible death if this saves or benefits the rest of his group. Anyone
who declines is subjected to doom and death, instead of revulsion
being directed at the world-order engendering of the situation. To
any independent observer, this plainly is to juxtapose incommensurable things; no future triumph or metamorphosis can justify
the pitiful blighting of a human being against his will. It is upon a
pavement of battered destinies that the survivors storm ahead toward new bland sensations and mass deaths. ("Fragments of an Interview," Aftenposten, 1959)
More provocative than it is astonishing, Zapffe's thought is perhaps the most elementary in the history of philosophical pessimism. As penetrable as it is cheerless, it rests on taboo
commonplaces and outlawed truisms while eschewing the recondite brain-twisters of his forerunners, all of whom engaged in
the kind of convoluted cerebration that for thousands of years 
30 
has been philosophy's stock in trade. For example, The World
as Will and Representation (two volumes, 1819 and 1844) by the
German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer lays out one of the
most absorbingly intricate metaphysical systems ever contrived-a quasi-mystical elaboration of a "Will-to-live" as the
hypostasis of reality, a mindless and untiring master of all being,
a directionless force that makes everything do what it does, an
imbecilic puppeteer that sustains the ruckus of our world. But
Schopenhauer's Will-to-live, commendable as it may seem as a
hypothesis, is too overwrought in the proving to be anything
more than another intellectual labyrinth for specialists in perplexity. Comparatively, Zapffe's principles are non-technical
and could never arouse the passion of professors or practitioners of philosophy, who typically circle around the minutiae of
theories and not the gross facts of our lives. If we must think, it
should be done only in circles, outside of which lies the unthinkable. Evidence: While commentators on Schopenhauer's
thought have seized upon it as a philosophical system ripe for
academic analysis, they do not emphasize that its ideal endpoint-the denial of the Will-to-live--is a construct for the
end of human existence. But even Schopenhauer himself did
not push this as aspect of his philosophy to its ideal endpoint,
which has kept him in fair repute as a philosopher.
Zombification
As adumbrated above, Zapffe arrived at two central determinations regarding humanity's "biological predicament." The first
was that consciousness had overreached the point of being a sufferable property of our species, and to minimize this problem
we must minimize our consciousness. From the many and various ways this may be done, Zapffe chose to hone in on four
principal strategies. 
 31
(1) ISOLATION. So that we may live without going into a
free-fall of trepidation, we isolate the dire facts of being alive by
relegating them to a remote compartment of our minds. They are
the lunatic family members in the attic whose existence we deny
in a conspiracy of silence.
(2) ANCHORING. To stabilize our lives in the tempestuous
waters of chaos, we conspire to anchor them in metaphysical and
institutional "verities"-God, Morality, Natural Law, Country,
Family-that inebriate us with a sense of being official, authentic,
and safe in our beds.
(3) DISTRACTION. To keep our minds unreflective of a
world of horrors, we distract them with a world of trifling or
momentous trash. The most operant method for furthering the
conspiracy, it is in continuous employ and demands only that
people keep their eyes on the ball--or their television sets, their
government's foreign policy, their science projects, their careers,
their place in society or the universe, etc.
(4) SUBLIMATION. That we might annul a paralyzing stage
fright at what may happen to even the soundest bodies and
minds, we sublimate our fears by making an open display of
them. In the Zapffean sense, sublimation is the rarest technique
utilized for conspiring against the human race. Putting into play
both deviousness and skill, this is what thinkers and artistic types
do when they recycle the most demoralizing and unnerving aspects of life as works in which the worst fortunes of humanity
are presented in a stylized and removed manner as entertainment.
In so many words, these thinkers and artistic types confect products that provide an escape from our suffering by a bogus simulation of it-a tragic drama or philosophical woolgathering, for
instance. Zapffe uses "The Last Messiah" to showcase how a literary-philosophical composition cannot perturb its creator or anyone else with the severity of true-to-life horrors but only provide
a pale representation of these horrors, just as a King Lear's weep-
32 
ing for his dead daughter Cordelia cannot rend its audience with
the throes of the real thing.
By watchful practice of the above connivances, we may keep
ourselves from scrutinizing too assiduously the startling and
dreadful mishaps that may befall us. These must come as a surprise, for if we expected them then the conspiracy could not
work its magic. Naturally, conspiracy theories seldom pique the
curiosity of "right-minded" individuals and are met with disbelief
and denial when they do. Best to immunize your consciousness
from any thoughts that are startling and dreadful so that we can
all go on conspiring to survive and reproduce as paradoxical beings-puppets that can walk and talk all by themselves. At worst
keep your startling and dreadful thoughts to yourself. Hearken
well: "None of us wants to hear spoken the exact anxieties we
keep locked up inside ourselves. Smother that urge to go spreading news of your pain and nightmares around town. Bury your
dead but don't leave a trace. And be sure to get on with things or
we will get on without you."
In his 1910 doctoral dissertation, published in English as Persuasion and Rhetoric (2004), the twenty-three-year-old Carlo
Michelstaedter audited the tactics we use to falsify human existence as we trade who we are, or might be, for a specious view
of ourselves. Like Pinocchio, Michelstaedter wanted to be a "real
boy" and not the product of a puppet maker who, in turn, did
not make himself but was made as he was made by mutations
that, as Zapffe relays to us from evolutionary theory, "must be
considered blind," a series of accidents that continually structure
and restructure all that exists in the workshop of the world. To
Michelstaedter, nothing in this world can be anything but a
puppet. And a puppet is only a plaything, a thing of parts
brought together as a simulacrum of real presence. It is nothing 
 33
in itself. It is not whole and individual but exists only relative to
other playthings, some of them human playthings that support
one another's illusion of being real. However, by suppressing
thoughts of suffering and death they give themselves away as beings of paradox-prevaricators who must hide from themselves
the flagrantly joyless possibilities of their lives if they are to go
on living. In Persuasion and Rhetoric, Michelstaedter pinpoints
the paradox of our division from ourselves: "man 'knows,' which
is why he is always two: his life and his knowing."
Michelstaedter's biographers and critics have speculated that
his despair of humanity's ability to become disentangled from its
puppet strings was, in conjunction with accidental factors, the
cause of his suicide by gunshot the day after he finished his dissertation. Michelstaedter could not accept a stellar fact of human
life: that none of us has control over what we are-a truth that
extirpates all hope if what you want to be is invulnerably selfpossessed ("persuaded") and without subjection to a life that
would fit you within the limits of its unrealities ("rhetoric," a
word oddly used by Michelstaedter). We are defined by our
limitations; without them, we cannot suffice as functionaries in
the big show of conscious existence. The farther you progress
toward a vision of our species without limiting conditions on
your consciousness, the farther you drift away from what makes
you a person among persons in the human community. In the
observance of Zapffe, an unleashed consciousness would alert us
to the falsity of ourselves and subject us to the pain of Pinocchio.
An individual's demarcations as a being, not his trespass of them,
create his identity and preserve his illusion of being something
special and not a freak of chance, a product of blind mutations.
Transcending all illusions and their emergent activities-having
absolute control of what we are and not what we need to be so
that we may survive the most unsavory facts of life and deathwould untether us from the moorings of our self-limited selves. 
34 
The lesson: "Let us love our limitations, for without them nobody would be left to be somebody."
Undoing II
The second of Zapffe's two central determinations-that our
species should belay reproducing itself-immediately brings to
mind a cast of characters from theological history known as
Gnostics. The Gnostic sect of the Cathari in twelfth-century
France were so tenacious in believing the world to be an evil
place engendered by an evil deity that its members were offered
a dual ultimatum: sexual abstinence or sodomy. (A similar sect in
Bulgaria, the Bogomils, became the etymological origin of the
term "buggery" for their practice of this mode of erotic release.)
Around the same period, the Catholic Church mandated abstinence for its clerics, a directive that did not halt them from betimes giving in to sexual quickening. The raison d'etre for this
doctrine was the attainment of grace (and in legend was obligatory for those scouring hither and yon for the Holy Grail) rather
than an enlightened governance of reproductive plugs and bungholes. With these exceptions, the Church did not counsel its followers to imitate its ascetic founder but sagaciously welcomed
them to breed as copiously as they could.
In another orbit from the theologies of either Gnosticism or
Catholicism, the nineteenth-century German philosopher
Philipp Mainlander (born Phillip Batz) also envisaged non-coital
existence as the surest path to redemption for the sin of being
congregants of this world. Our extinction, however, would not
be the outcome of an unnatural chastity, but would be a naturally occurring phenomenon once we had evolved far enough to
apprehend our existence as so hopelessly pointless and unsatisfactory that we would no longer be subject to generative
promptings. Paradoxically, this evolution toward life-sickness 
 35
would be promoted by a mounting happiness among us. This
happiness would be quickened by our following Mainlander's
evangelical guidelines for achieving such things as universal justice and charity. Only by securing every good that could be gotten in life, Mainlander figured, could we know that they were
not as good as nonexistence.
While the abolishment of human life would be sufficient
for the average pessimist, the terminal stage of Mainlander's
wishful thought was the full summoning of a "Will-to-die" that
by his deduction resided in all matter across the universe.
Mainlander diagrammed this brainstorm, along with others as
riveting, in a treatise whose title has been translated into English as The Philosophy of Redemption (1876). Unsurprisingly, the
work never set the philosophical world ablaze. Perhaps the author might have garnered greater celebrity if, like the Austrian
philosopher Otto Weininger in his infamous study translated as
Sex and Character (1903), he had devoted himself to gripping
ruminations on male and female matters rather than the redemptive disappearance of everyone regardless of gender.4
As one who had a special plan for the human race,
Mainlander was not a modest thinker. "We are not everyday
people," he once wrote in the royal third-person, "and must pay
dearly for dining at the table of the gods." To top it off, suicide
ran in his family. On the day his Philosophy of Redemption was
published, Mainlander killed himself, possibly in a fit of megalomania but just as possibly in surrender to the extinction that
for him was so attractive and that he avouched for a most esoteric reason-Deicide.
Mainlander was confident that the Will-to-die he believed
would well up in humanity had been spiritually grafted into us
by a God who, in the beginning, masterminded His own quietus. It seems that existence was a horror to God. Unfortunately,
God was impervious to the depredations of time. This being so, 

His only means to get free of Himself was by a divine form of
suicide.
God's plan to suicide himself could not work, though, as
long as He existed as a unified entity outside of space-time and
matter. Seeking to nullify His oneness so that He could be delivered into nothingness, he shattered Himself-Big Bang-like-­
into the time-bound fragments of the universe, that is, all those
objects and organisms that have been accumulating here and
there for billions of years. In Mainlander's philosophy, "God
knew that he could change from a state of super-reality into
non-being only through the development of a real world of
multiformity." Employing this strategy, He excluded Himself
from being. "God is dead," wrote Mainlander, "and His death
was the life of the world." Once the great individuation had
been initiated, the momentum of its creator's self-annihilation
would continue until everything became exhausted by its own
existence, which for human beings meant that the faster they
learned that happiness was not as good as they thought it would
be, the happier they would be to die out.
So: The Will-to-live that Schopenhauer argued activates the
world to its torment was revised by his disciple Mainlander not
only as evidence of a tortured life within living beings, but also
as a cover for a clandestine will in all things to burn themselves
out as hastily as possible in the fires of becoming. In this light,
human progress is shown to be an ironic symptom that our
downfall into extinction has been progressing nicely, because
the more things change for the better, the more they progress
toward a reliable end. And those who committed suicide, as did
Mainlander, would only be forwarding God's blueprint for
bringing an end to His Creation. Naturally, those who replaced
themselves by procreation were of no help: "Death is succeeded
by the absolute nothing; it is the perfect annihilation of each
individual in appearance and being, supposing that by him no 
 37
child has been begotten or born; for otherwise the individual
would live on in that." Mainlander's argument that in the long
run nonexistence is superior to existence was cobbled together
from his unorthodox interpretation of Christian doctrines and
from Buddhism as he understood it.
As the average conscious mortal knows, Christianity and
Buddhism are all for leaving this world behind, with their leavetaking being for destinations unknown and impossible to conceive. For Mainlander, these destinations did not exist. His forecast was that one day our will to survive in this life or any other
will be universally extinguished by a conscious will to die and
stay dead, after the example of the Creator. From the standpoint of Mainlander's philosophy, Zapffe's Last Messiah would
not be an unwelcome sage but a crowning force of the postdivine era. Rather than resist our end, as Mainlander concludes,
we will come to see that "the knowledge that life is worthless is
the flower of all human wisdom." Elsewhere the philosopher
states, "Life is hell, and the sweet still night of absolute death is
the annihilation of hell."
Inhospitable to rationality as Mainlander's cosmic scenario
may seem, it should nonetheless give pause to anyone who is
keen to make sense of the universe. Consider this: If something
like God exists, or once existed, what would He not be capable
of doing, or undoing? Why should God not want to be done
with Himself because, unbeknownst to us, suffering was the essence of His being? Why should He not have brought forth a
universe that is one great puppet show destined by Him to be
crunched or scattered until an absolute nothingness had been
established? Why should He fail to see the benefits of nonexistence, as many of His lesser beings have? Revealed scripture
there may be that tells a different story. But that does not mean
it was revealed by a reliable narrator. Just because He asserted
it was all good does not mean he meant what He said. Perhaps 

He did not want to leave a bad impression by telling us He had
absented Himself from the ceremonies before they had begun.
Alone and immortal, nothing needed Him. Per Mainlander,
though, He needed to bust out into a universe to complete His
project of self-extinction, passing on His horror piecemeal, so
to say, to His creation.
Mainlander's first philosophy, and last, is in fact no odder
than any religious or secular ethos that presupposes the worth
of human life. Both are objectively insupportable and irrational.
Mainlander was a pessimist, and, just as with any optimist, he
needed something to support his gut feeling about being alive.
No one has yet conceived an authoritative reason for why the
human race should continue or discontinue its being, although
some believe they have. Mainlander was sure he had an answer
to what he judged to be the worthlessness and pain of existence, and none may peremptorily belie it. Ontologically,
Mainlander's thought is delirious; metaphorically, it explains a
good deal about human experience; practically, it may in time
prove to be consistent with the idea of creation as a structure of
creaking bones being eaten from within by a pestilent marrow.
That there is redemption to be found in an ecumenical nonexistence is an old idea on which Mainlander put a new face.
For some it is a cherished idea, like that of a peaceful afterlife
or progress toward perfection in this life. The need for such
ideas comes out of the fact that existence is a condition with no
redeeming qualities. If this were not so, none would need cherished ideas like an ecumenical nonexistence, a peaceful afterlife,
or progress toward perfection in this life.5
Self-Hypnosis
Among the unpleasantries of human existence is the abashment
we suffer when we feel our lives to be destitute of meaning
with respect to who we are, what we do, and the general way 
 39
we believe things to be in the universe. If one doubts that felt
meanings are imperative to our developing or maintaining a
state of good feeling, just lay your eyes on the staggering number of books and therapies for a market of individuals who suffer from a deficiency of meaning, either in a limited and
localized variant ("I am satisfied that my life has meaning because I received an 'A' on my calculus exam") or one that is
macrocosmic in scope ("I am satisfied that my life has meaning
because God loves me"). Few are the readers of Norman Vincent Peale's The Power of Positive Thinking (1952) who do not
feel dissatisfied with who they are, what they do, and the general way they believe things to be in the universe. Millions of
copies of Peale's book and its imitations have been sold; and
they are not purchased by readers well satisfied with the number or intensity of felt meanings in their lives and thus with
their place on the ladder of "subjective well being," in the vernacular of positive psychology, a movement that came into its
own in the early years of the twenty-first century with a spate
of books about how almost anyone could lead happily meaningful lives.6 Martin Seligman, the architect of positive psychology,
defines his brainchild as "the science of what makes life worth
living" and synopsized its principles in Authentic Happiness: Using the New Positive Psychology to Realize Your Potential for
Lasting Fulfillment (2002) .
There is nothing new, of course, about people searching for
a happily meaningful life in a book. With the exception of sacred texts, possibly the most successful self-help manual of all
time is Emile Coue's Self Mastery through Conscious Autosuggestion (1922). Coue was an advocate of self-hypnosis, and there is
little doubt that he had an authentically philanthropic desire to
help others lead more salutary lives. On his lecture tours, he
was greeted by celebrities and dignitaries around the world.
Hordes turned out for his funeral in 1926. 

Coue is best known for urging believers in his method to
repeat the following sentence: "Day by day, in every way, I am
getting better and better." How could his readers not feel that
their lives had meaning, or were proceeding toward meaningfulness, by hypnotizing themselves with these words day by
day? While being alive is all right for the world's general population, some of us need to get it in writing that this is so.
Every other creature in the world is insensate to meaning. But
those of us on the high ground of evolution are replete with
this unnatural need which any comprehensive encyclopedia of
philosophy treats under the heading LIFE, THE MEANING OF. In
its quest for a sense of meaning, humanity has given countless
answers to questions that were never posed to it. But though
our appetite for meaning may be appeased for a time, we are
deceived if we think it is ever gone for good. Years may pass
during which we are unmolested by LIFE, THE MEANING OF.
Some days we wake up and innocently say, "It's good to be
alive." Broken down, this exclamation means that we are experiencing an acute sense of well-being. If everyone were in
such elevated spirits all the time, the topic of LIFE, THE MEANING OF would never enter our minds or our philosophical reference books. But an ungrounded jubilation-or even a neutral
reading on the monitor of our moods-must lapse, either intermittently or for the rest of our natural lives. Our consciousness, having snoozed awhile in the garden of incuriosity, is
pricked by some thorn or other, perhaps DEATH, THE MEANING OF, or spontaneously modulates to a minor key due to the
vagaries of our brain chemistry, the weather, or for causes not
confirmable. Then the hunger returns for LIFE, THE M EANING
OF, the emptiness must be filled again, the pursuit resumed.
(There is more on meaning in the section Unpersons contained
in the next chapter, "") 

Perhaps we might gain some perspective on our earthly
term if we stopped thinking of ourselves as beings who enact a
"life." This word is loaded with connotations to which it has no
right. Instead, we should substitute "existence" for "life" and
forget about how well or badly we enact it. None of us "has a
life" in the narrative-biographical way we think of these words.
What we have are so many years of existence. It would not occur to us to say that any man or woman is in the "prime of existence." Speaking of "existence" rather than "life" unclothes the
latter word of its mystique. Who would ever claim that "existence is all right, especially when you consider the alternative"?
Cosmophobia
As heretofore noted, consciousness may have assisted our species' survival in the hard times of prehistory, but as it became
ever more intense it evolved the potential to ruin everything if
not securely muzzled. This is the problem: We must either outsmart consciousness or be thrown into its vortex of doleful factuality and suffer, as Zapffe termed it, a "dread of being"-not
only of our own being but of being itself, the idea that the vacancy that might otherwise have obtained is occupied like a
stall in a public lavatory of infinite dimensions, that there is a
universe in which things like celestial bodies and human beings
are roving about, that anything exists in the way it seems to exist, that we are part of all being until we stop being, if there is
anything we may understand as being other than semblances or
the appearance of semblances.
On the premise that consciousness must be obfuscated so
that we might go on as we have all these years, Zapffe inferred
that the sensible thing would be not to go on with the paradoxical nonsense of trying to inhibit our cardinal attribute as
beings, since we can tolerate existence only if we believe--in
accord with a complex of illusions, a legerdemain of duplic-
42 
ity-that we are not what we are: unreality on legs. As conscious beings, we must hold back that divulgement lest it break
us with a sense of being things without significance or foundation, anatomies shackled to a landscape of unintelligible horrors.
In plain language, we cannot live except as self-deceivers who
must lie to ourselves about ourselves, as well as about our unwinnable situation in this world.7
Accepting the preceding statements as containing some
truth, or at least for the sake of moving on with the present
narrative, it seems that we are zealots of Zapffe's four plans for
smothering consciousness: isolation ("Being alive is all right"),
anchoring ("One Nation under God with Families, Morality,
and Natural Birthrights for all"), distraction ("Better to kill time
than kill oneself"), and sublimation ("I am writing a book titled
The Conspiracy against the Human Race"). These practices
make us organisms with a nimble intellect that can deceive
themselves "for their own good." Isolation, anchoring, distraction, and sublimation are among the wiles we use to keep ourselves from dispelling every illusion that keeps us up and
running. Without this cognitive double-dealing, we would be
exposed for what we are. It would be like looking into a mirror
and for a moment seeing the skull inside our skin looking back
at us with its sardonic smile. And beneath the skull-only
blackness, nothing. Someone is there, so we feel, and yet no one
is there--the uncanny paradox, all the horror in a glimpse. A
little piece of our world has been peeled back, and underneath
is creaking desolation-a carnival where all the rides are moving but no patrons occupy the seats. We are missing from the
world we have made for ourselves. Maybe if we could resolutely gaze wide-eyed at our lives we would come to know
what we really are. But that would stop the showy attraction
we are inclined to think will run forever.8 
 43
Pessimism I
Along with every other tendentious mindset, pessimism may be
construed as a fluke of temperament, a shifty word that will
just have to do until a better one comes along. Without the
temperament that was given to them in large portion, pessimists would not see existence as basically undesirable. Optimists may have fugitive doubts about the basic desirability of
existence, but pessimists never doubt that existence is basically
undesirable. If you interrupted them in the middle of an ecstatic moment, which pessimists do have, and asked if existence
is basically undesirable, they would reply "Of course" before returning to their ecstasy. Why they should answer in this way is
a closed book. The conclusions to which temperament lead an
individual, whether or not they are conclusions refractory to
those of world society, are simply not subject to analysis.
Composed of the same dross as all mortals, the pessimist
cleaves to whatever seems to validate his thoughts and emotions. Scarce among us are those who not only want to think
they are right, but also expect others to affirm their least notion
as unassailable. Pessimists are no exception. But they are few
and do not show up on the radar of our race. Immune to the
blandishments of religions, countries, families, and everything
else that puts both average and above-average citizens in the
limelight, pessimists are sideliners in both history and the media. Without belief in gods or ghosts, unmotivated by a comprehensive delusion, they could never plant a bomb, plan a
revolution, or shed blood for a cause.
Identical with religions that ask of their believers more than they
can possibly make good on, pessimism is a set of ideals that none
can follow to the letter. Those who indict a pessimist of either
pathology or intellectual recalcitrance are only faking their competence to explain what cannot be explained: the mystery of 
44 
why individuals are the way they are. To some extent, however,
why some individuals are the way they are is not a full-fledged
mystery. There are traits that run in families-legacies lurking in
the genes of one generation that may profit or impair those of
another. Philosophical pessimism has been called a maladaptation
by those who are concerned with such things. This call seems indisputably correct. The possibility must be considered, then, that
there is a genetic marker for philosophical pessimism that nature
has all but deselected from our race so that we may keep on living as we have all these years. Allowing for the theory that pessimism is weakly hereditary, and is getting weaker all the time
because it is maladaptive, the genes that make up the fiber of ordinary folk may someday celebrate an everlasting triumph over
those of the congenitally pessimistic, ridding nature of all worry
that its protocol of survival and reproduction for its most conscious species will be challenged-unless Zapffe is right and consciousness itself is maladaptive, making philosophical pessimism
the correct call despite its unpopularity among those who think,
or say they think, that being alive is all right. But psychobiographers do not often take what is adaptive or maladaptive
for our species into account when writing of a chosen member
of the questionably dying breed of pessimists. To them, their
subject's temperament has a twofold inception: (1) life stories of
tribulation, even though the pessimistic caste has no sorrows exclusive to it; (2) intractable wrongheadedness, a charge that pessimists could turn against optimists if the argumentum ad
populum were not the world's favorite fallacy.
The major part of our species seems able to undergo any
trauma without significantly re-examining its household mantras, including "everything happens for a reason," "the show
must go on," "accept the things you cannot change," and any
other adage that gets people to keep their chins up. But pessi-
 45
mists cannot give themselves over to this program, and its
catchwords stick in their throats. To them, the Creation is objectionable and useless on principle-the worst possible dispatch of bad news. It seems so bad, so wrong, that, should such
authority be unwisely placed into their hands, they would make
it a prosecutable malfeasance to produce a being who might
turn out to be a pessimist.
Disenfranchised by nature, pessimists feel that they have
been impressed into this world by the reproductive liberty of
positive thinkers who are ever-thoughtful of the future. At
whatever point in time one is situated, the future always looks
better than the present, just as the present looks better than the
past. No one today would write, as did the British essayist
Thomas De Quincey in the early nineteenth century: "A quarter
of man's misery is toothache." Knowing what we know of the
progress toward the alleviation of human misery throughout
history, who would damn their children to have a piteous
toothache in the early nineteenth century, or in times before it,
back to the days when Homo sapiens with toothaches
scrounged to feed themselves and shivered in the cold? To the
regret of pessimists, our primitive ancestors could not see that
theirs was not a time in which to produce children.
So at what time was it that people knew enough to say, "This
is the time in which to produce children''? When did we think
that enough progress had been made toward the alleviation of
human misery that children could be produced without our being torn by a crisis of conscience? The easy years of the Pharaohs
and Western antiquity? The lazy days of the Dark Ages? The
palmy decades of the Industrial Revolution as well as the other
industry-driven periods that followed? The breakthrough era in
which advancements in dentistry allayed humanity of onequarter of its misery?
But few or none have ever had a crisis of conscience about 

producing children, because all children have been born at the
best possible time in human history, or at least the one in which
the most progress toward the alleviation of human misery has
been made, which is always the time in which we live and have
lived. While we have always looked back on previous times and
thought that their progress toward the alleviation of human
misery was not enough for us to want to live then, we do not
know any better than the earliest Homo sapiens about what
progress toward the alleviation of human misery will be made
in the future, reasonably presuming that such progress will be
made. And even though we may speculate about that progress,
we feel no resentment about not being able to take advantage
of it, or not many of us do. Nor will those of the future resent
not living in the world of their future because even greater progress toward the alleviation of human misery will by then have
been made in medicine, social conditions, political arrangements, and other areas that are almost universally regarded as
domains in which human life could be better.
Will there ever be an end of the line in our progress toward
the alleviation of human misery when people can honestly say,
"This is without doubt the time produce children"? And will
that really be the time? No one would say, or even want to
think that theirs is a time in which people will look back on
them from the future and thank their stars that they did not
live in such a barbaric age that had made so little progress toward the alleviation of human misery and still produced children. As if anyone ever cared or will ever care, this is what the
pessimist would say: "There has never been and never will be a
time in which to produce children. Now will forever be a bad
time for doing that." Moreover, the pessimist would advise each
of us not to look too far into the future or we will see the reproachful faces of the unborn looking back at us from the radiant mist of their nonexistence. 
 47
Pessimism II
In his lengthy study Pessimism (1877), James Sully wrote that "a
just and correct estimate of life is to be looked for" in "views ...
which lean neither to the favourable nor the unfavourable
pole." By this claim, Sully erred in his otherwise able dissection
of his subject. People are either pessimists or optimists. They
forcefully "lean" one way or the other, and there is no common
ground between them. For pessimists, life is something that
should not be, which means that what they believe should be is
the absence of life, nothing, non-being, the emptiness of the
uncreated. Anyone who speaks up for life as something that irrefutably should be--that we would not be better off unborn,
extinct, or forever lazing in nonexistence--is an optimist. It is
all or nothing; one is in or one is out, abstractly speaking. Practically speaking, we have been a race of optimists since the nascency of human consciousness and lean like mad toward the
favorable pole.
More stylish in his examination of pessimism than Sully is
the American novelist and part-time philosopher Edgar Saltus,
whose Philosophy of Disenchantment (1885) and The Anatomy of
Negation (1886) were written for those who treasure philosophical and literary works of a pessimistic, nihilistic, or defeatist
nature as indispensable to their existence. In Saltus's estimation,
a "just and correct view of human life" would justly and correctly determine human life as that which should not be.
Controverting the absolutist standards of pessimism and optimism as outlined above are "heroic" pessimists, or rather heroic
"pessimists." These are self-styled pessimists who take into consideration Sully's unfavorable pole but are not committed to its
entailment that life is something that should not be. In his
Tragic Sense of Life in Men and Nations (1913), the Spanish
writer Miguel de Unamuno speaks of consciousness as a disease
bred by a conflict between the rational and the irrational. The 

rational is identified with the conclusions of consciousness, primarily that we will all die. The irrational represents all that is
vital in humanity, including a universal desire for immortality in
either a physical or nonphysical state. The coexistence of the rational and the irrational turns the human experience into a
wrangle of contradictions to which we can bow our heads in
resignation or defy as heroes of futility. Unamuno's penchant
was for the heroic course, with the implied precondition that
one has the physical and psychological spunk for the fight. In
line with Unamuno, Joshua Foa Dienstag, author of Pessimism:
Philosophy, Ethic, Spirit (2006), is also a proselytizer for a
healthy, heroic pessimism (quotes implied) that faces up to
much of the dispiriting lowdown on life, all radically pessimistic
visions being cropped out of the picture, and marches on toward
a future believed to be personally and politically workable. Also
siding with this never-say-die group is William R. Brashear,
whose The Desolation of Reality (1995) concludes with a format
for redemption, however partial and imperfect, by holding tight
to what he calls "tragic humanism," which recognizes human
life's "ostensible insignificance, but also the necessity of proceeding as if this were not so, ... willfully nourishing and sustaining
the underlying illusions of value and order." How we nourish
and sustain illusions of value and order in our lives is explained
in Zapffe's "The Last Messiah." How we might nourish and sustain at will what we know to be illusions without a covenant of
ignominious pretense among us is not explained by Brashear and
has never been explained by anyone else who espouses this Ja­
<;on de vivre. Not in the same class of pessimism as the antinatalist Zapffe--Unamuno, Dienstag, and Brashear meet existence more than halfway, safely joined in solidarity with both
ordinary and sophisticated folk, who take their lumps like
grown-ups and by doing so retain their status with the status
quo. Attuned as they may be to the pessimist's attitude that life 
 49
is something which should not be, they do not approve of it. But
Unamuno, Dienstag, and Brashear's solution to the pessimist's
rejection of life puts us in the same paradoxical bind that Zapffe
sees in human existence, that is, living with the pretense that
being alive is all right. The only difference is that Unamuno, Dienstag, and Brashear knowingly accede to a pretense that ordinary folk shirk knowing, at least as a general rule, because even
average mortals are sometimes forced to admit this pretensethey just do not linger over it long enough to make it a philosophical point of pride and sing their own praises for doing so.
A philosophical cohort of U namuno, Dienstag, and Brashear
is the French existentialist writer Albert Camus. In his essay
The Myth of Sisyphus (1942)1 Camus represents the unattainable
goal of the title figure as an apologetic for going on with life
rather than ending it. As he insists in his discussion of this gruesome parable, "We must imagine Sisyphus as happy" as he rolls
his boulder to the top of mountain from which it always tumbles down again and again and again to his despair. The credo of
the Church Father Tertullian, "I believe because it is absurd,"
might justly be placed in the context of Camus's belief that being alive is all right, or all right enough, though it may be absurd. Indeed, the connection has not been overlooked. Caught
between the irrationality of the Carthaginian and the intellectuality of the Frenchman, Zapffe's proposal that we put out the
light of the human race extends to us an antidote for our existential infirmities that is infinitely more satisfying than that of
either Tertullian or his avatar Camus, the latter of whom meditated on suicide as a philosophical issue for the individual yet
did not entertain the advantages of an all-out attrition of the
species. By not doing so, one might conclude that Camus was
only being practical. In the end, though, his insistence that we
must imagine Sisyphus as happy is as impractical as it is feculent. Like Unamuno, Dienstag, and Brashear, Camus believed 
50 
we can assume a view of life that can content us with the tragedy, nightmare, and meaninglessness of human existence. Camus may have been able to assume this view of life before his
life ended in a vehicular misadventure, but he must have been
jesting to pose it as a possibility or a duty for the world.
It would be a sign of callowness to bemoan the fact that pessimistic writers do not rate and may be reprehended in both
good conscience and good company. Some critics of the pessimist often think they have his back to the wall when they
blithely jeer, "If that is how this fellow feels, he should either
kill himself or be decried as a hypocrite." That the pessimist
should kill himself in order to live up to his ideas may be counterattacked as betraying such a crass intellect that it does not
deserve a response. Yet it is not much of a chore to produce
one. Simply because someone has reached the conclusion that
the amount of suffering in this world is enough that anyone
would be better off never having been born does not mean that
by force of logic or sincerity he must kill himself. It only means
he has concluded that the amount of suffering in this world is
enough that anyone would be better off never having been
born. Others may disagree on this point as it pleases them, but
they must accept that if they believe themselves to have a
stronger case than the pessimist, then they are mistaken.
Naturally, there are pessimists who do kill themselves, but
nothing obliges them to kill themselves or live with the mark of
the hypocrite on their brow. Voluntary death might seem a
thoroughly negative course of action, but it is not as simple as
that. Every negation is adulterated or stealthily launched by an
affirmative spirit. An unequivocal "no" cannot be uttered or
acted upon. Lucifer's last words in heaven may have been "Non
serviam," but none has served the Almighty so dutifully, since
His sideshow in the clouds would never draw any customers if 
 51
it were not for the main attraction of the devil's hell on earth.
Only catatonics and coma patients can persevere in a dignified
withdrawal from life's rattle and hum. Without a "yes" in our
hearts, nothing would be done. And to be done with our existence en masse would be the most ambitious affirmation of all.
Most people think that vitality is betokened only by such phenomena as people in their eighties who hike mountain trails or
nations that build empires. This way of thinking is simply naive,
but it keeps up our morale because we like to imagine we will
be able to hike mountain trails when we are in our eighties or
live as citizens of a nation that has built an empire. And so the
denunciations of critics who say the pessimist should kill himself
or be decried as a hypocrite make every kind of sense in a world
of card-carrying or crypto optimists. Once this is understood, the
pessimist can spare himself from suffering more than he need at
the hands of "normal people," a confederation of upstanding creatures who in concert keep the conspiracy going. This is not to say
that such individuals do not suffer so much and in such a way
that they sometimes kill themselves, possibly even more per capita than do pessimists, or that because they kill themselves they
are hypocrites for ever having said that anyone is better off for
having been born. It is only to say that when normal individuals
kill themselves, even after having said that anyone is better off
for having been born, they are disqualified as normal individuals,
because normal individuals do not kill themselves but until their
dying day think that being alive is all right and that happiness
will stand out in the existence of life's newcomers, who, it is always assumed, will be as normal as they are.
Blundering
Consciousness is an existential liability, as every pessimist
agrees-a blunder of blind nature, according to Zapffe, that has 
52 
taken humankind down a black hole of logic. To make it
through this life, we must make believe that we are not what
we are--contradictory beings whose continuance only worsens
our plight as mutants who embody the contorted logic of a
paradox. To correct this blunder, we should desist from procreating. What could be more judicious or more urgent, existentially speaking, than our self-administered oblivion? At the very
least, we might give some regard to this theory of the blunder
as a "thought-experiment." All civilizations become defunct. All
species die out. There is even an expiration date on the universe itself. Human beings would certainly not be the first phenomenon to go belly up. But we could be the first to
precipitate our own passing, abbreviating it before the bodies
really started to stack up. Could we know to their most finegrained details the lives of all who came before us, would we
bless them for the care they took to keep the race blundering
along? Could we exhume them alive, would we shake their
bony, undead hands and promise to pass on the favor of living
to future generations? Surely that is what they would want to
hear, or at least that is what we want to think they would want
to hear. And just as surely that is what we would want to hear
from our descendents living in far posterity, strangers though
they would be as they shook our bony, undead hands.
Nature proceeds by blunders; that is its way. It is also ours. So if
we have blundered by regarding consciousness as a blunder,
why make a fuss over it? Our self-removal from this planet
would still be a magnificent move, a feat so luminous it would
bedim the sun. What do we have to lose? No evil would attend
our departure from this world, and the many evils we have
known would go extinct along with us. So why put off what
would be the most laudable masterstroke of our existence, and
the only one? 
 53
Of course, phenomena other than consciousness have been
thought to be blunders, beginning with life itself. For example,
in a novel titled At the Mountains of Madness (1936), the
American writer H. P. Lovecraft has one of his characters mention a "primal myth" about "Great Old Ones who filtered down
from the stars and concocted earth life as a joke or mistake."
Schopenhauer, once he had drafted his own mythology that
everything in the universe is energized by a Will-to-live, shifted
to a commonsense pessimism to represent life as a congeries of
excruciations.
[L] ife presents itself by no means as a gift for enjoyment, but as a
task, a drudgery to be performed; and in accordance with this we
see, in great and small, universal need, ceaseless cares, constant
pressure, endless strife, compulsory activity, with extreme
exertion of all the powers of body and mind. Many millions,
united into nations, strive for the common good, each individual
on account of his own; but many thousands fall as a sacrifice for it.
Now senseless delusions, now intriguing politics, incite them to
wars with each other; then the sweat and the blood of the great
multitude must flow, to carry out the ideas of individuals, or to
expiate their faults. In peace industry and trade are active,
inventions work miracles, seas are navigated, delicacies are
collected from all ends of the world, the waves engulf thousands.
All push and drive, others acting; the tumult is indescribable. But
the ultimate aim of it all, what is it? To sustain ephemeral and
tormented individuals through a short span of time in the most
fortunate case with endurable want and comparative freedom
from pain, which, however, is at once attended with ennui; then
the reproduction of this race and its striving. In this evident
disproportion between the trouble and the reward, the will to live
appears to us from this point of view, if taken objectively, as a
fool, or subjectively, as a delusion, seized by which everything
living works with the utmost exertion of its strength for some
thing that is of no value. But when we consider it more closely,
we shall find here also that it is rather a blind pressure, a tendency
entirely without ground or motive. (The World as Will and
Representation, trans. R. B. Haldane and J. Kemp) 
54 
Schopenhauer is here straightforward in limning his awareness
that, for human beings, existence is a state of demonic mania,
with the Will-to-live as the possessing spirit of "ephemeral and
tormented individuals." Elsewhere in his works, he denominates
consciousness as "an accident of life." A blunder. A mistake. Is
there really anything behind our smiles and tears but an evolutionary slip-up?
Analogies
Schopenhauer's is a great pessimism, not least because it reveals
a signature motif of the pessimistic imagination. As indicated,
Schopenhauer's insights are yoked to a philosophical superstructure centered on the Will, or the Will-to-live-a blind,
deaf, and dumb force that rouses human beings to their detriment. While Schopenhauer's system of thought is as impossible
to swallow as that of any other systematic philosopher, no intelligent person can fail to see that every living thing behaves
exactly in conformity with his philosophy in its liberal articulation. Wound up like toys by some force-call it Will, elan vital,
anima mundi, physiological or psychological processes, nature,
or whatever-organisms go on running as they are bidden until
they run down. In pessimistic philosophies only the force is
real, not the things activated by it. They are only puppets, and
if they have consciousness may mistakenly believe they are selfwinding persons who are making a go of it on their own.
Here, then, is the signature motif of the pessimistic imagination that Schopenhauer made discernible: Behind the scenes of
Zif e there is something pernicious that makes a nightmare of our
world. For Zapffe, the evolutionary mutation of consciousness
tugged us into tragedy. For Michelstaedter, individuals can exist
only as unrealities that are made as they are made and that cannot make themselves otherwise because their hands are forced
by the "god" of philopsychia (self-love) to accept positive illu-
 55
sions about themselves or not accept themselves at all. For
Mainlander, a Will-to-die, not Schopenhauer's Will-to-live,
plays the occult master pulling our strings, making us dance in
fitful motions like marionettes caught in a turbulent wake left
by the passing of a self-murdered god. For Bahnsen, a purposeless force breathes a black life into everything and feasts upon it
part by part, regurgitating itself into itself, ever-renewing the
throbbing forms of its repast. For all others who suspect that
something is amiss in the lifeblood of being, something they
cannot verbalize, there are the malformed shades of suffering
and death that chase them into the false light of contenting lies.
By analogy with that pernicious something the pessimist senses
behind the scenes of life are the baleful agencies that govern the
world of supernatural horror fiction. Actually, it would be
more proper to speak of the many worlds of supernatural horror, since they vary from author to author as much as the renderings of the human fiasco vary from pessimist to pessimist.
Even within the writings of a single author, the source of something pernicious that makes a nightmare of our world switches
about, the common link being a state of affairs that overturns
our conception of reality for the worse.
In "The Willows," for instance, the twentieth-century British
writer Algernon Blackwood suggests that an inimical force abides
within nature. What this enormity might be is known to the
characters of the story only by mysterious signs and sounds that
unnerve them as they make their way in a small boat down the
Danube and camp for the night on an island overgrown with willows, which become the symbolic focus of a region where nature
shows its most menacing aspect. The narrator tries to explain
what it is about the willows that seems particularly threatening
to him, as distinct from the more immediate perils of the severe
weather conditions that have developed along the Danube. 
56 
A rising river, perhaps, always suggests something of the ominous:
many of the little islands I saw before me would probably have
been swept away by the morning; this resistless, thundering water
touched the deep sense of awe. Yet I was aware that my uneasiness lay deeper far than the emotions of awe and wonder. It was
not that I felt. Nor had it directly to do with the power of the
driving wind-this shouting hurricane that might almost carry up
a few acres of willows into the air and scatter them like so much
chaff over the landscape. The wind was simply enjoying itself, for
nothing rose out of the flat landscape to stop it, and I was conscious of sharing its great game with a kind of pleasurable excitement. Yet this novel emotion had nothing to do with the wind
Indeed, so vague was the sense of distress I experienced, that it
was impossible to trace it to its source and deal with it accordingly, though I was aware somehow that it had to do with our utter insignificance before this unrestrained power of the elements
about me. The huge-grown river had something to do with it
too--a vague, unpleasant idea that we had somehow trifled with
these great elemental forces in whose power we lay helpless every
hour of the day and night. For here, indeed, they were gigantically
at play together, and the sight appealed to the imagination.
But my emotion, so far as I could understand it, seemed to attach itself more particularly to the willow bushes, to these acres
and acres of willows, crowding, so thickly growing there, swarming everywhere the eye could reach, pressing upon the river as
though to suffocate it, standing in dense array mile after mile beneath the sky, watching, waiting, listening. And, apart from the
elements, the willows connected themselves subtly with my malaise, attacking the mind insidiously somehow by reason of their
vast numbers, and contriving in some way or other to represent to
the imagination a new and mighty power, a power, moreover, not
altogether friendly to us.
The mystery of the pernicious something that the willows represent is never resolved. However, at the end of the story the
two travelers see a man turning over and over in the rushing
river. And he bears "their mark" in the form of indentations
they had seen before in the sands of the island-funnels that 
 57
formed and grew in size throughout the night the men had
camped on the island. Whatever power that was not "altogether
friendly to us" had procured its victim and satisfied itself. The
men had been saved at the price of another's death. That which
makes a nightmare of our world had revealed itself for a time
and withdrawn once again behind the scenes of life.
Such is the motif of supernatural horror: Something terrible in its
being comes forward and makes its claim as a shareholder in our
reality, or what we think is our reality and ours alone. It may be
an emissary from the grave or an esoteric monstrosity, as in the
ghost stories of M. R. James. It may be the offspring of a scientific
experiment with unintended consequences, as in Arthur Machen' s ''The Great God Pan," or the hitherto unheard-of beings in
the same author's "The White People." It may be a hideous token
of another dimension revealed only in a mythic tome, as in
Robert W. Chambers' "The Yellow Sign." Or it may be a world
unto itself of pure morbidity, one suffused with a profound sense
of a doom without a name--Edgar Allan Poe's world.
Reflected in the works of many supernatural writers, the
signature motif Schopenhauer made discernible in pessimism
was most consistently promulgated by Lovecraft, a paragon
among literary figures who have thought the unthinkable, or at
least thought what most mortals do not want to think. In conceiving Azathoth, that "nuclear chaos" which "bubbles at the
center of all infinity," Lovecraft might well have been thinking
of Schopenhauer's Will. As instantiated in Lovecraft's stories,
the pernicious something that makes a nightmare of our world
is individuated into linguistically teratological entities from beyond or outside of our universe. Like ghosts or the undead,
their very existence spooks us as a violation of what should and
should not be, suggesting unknown modes of being and uncanny creations which epitomize supernatural horror. 
58 
Life-Principles
Philosophically, Lovecraft was a dyed-in-the-wool scientific
materialist. Nevertheless, he is a felicitous example of someone
who knew ravishments that in another context would qualify
as "spiritual" or "religious." Yet from childhood he adhered to a
vigorous atheism. In his lectures collected as The Varieties of
Religious Experience (1 902), William James proposes that a
sense of "ontological wonder" and "cosmic emotion" argues for
the legitimacy of religious faith. In both his creative writings
and his letters, Lovecraft's expression of the feelings James describes form an exception to the philosopher-psychologist's argument.9 For Lovecraft, cosmic wonder and a "tranquility
tinged with terror," as the British political theorist and aesthetician Edmund Burke referred to such experiences, were basic to
his interest in remaining alive. Sublimating his awareness of the
universe as nothingness in motion, he also mitigated the boredom that plagued his life by distracting himself with reveries of
"surprise, discovery, strangeness, and the impingement of the cosmic, lawless, and mystical upon the prosaic sphere of the known "
(Lovecraft's emphasis) .
From the other side of an emotional and spiritual chasm,
the French scientist and Christian philosopher Blaise Pascal
wrote of his a sense of being "engulfed in the infinite immensity
of spaces whereof I know nothing, and which know nothing of
me; I am terrified. The eternal silence of these infinite spaces
fills me with dread" (Pensees, 1 670). Pascal's is not an unnatural
reaction for those phobic to infinite spaces that know nothing
of them. "Kenophobia" is the fear of such vast spaces and voids.
Perhaps kenophilia should be coined to describe the "ontological wonder" and "cosmic emotion" Lovecraft felt when he contemplated the outer rim of the unknown.
A complex and contradictory figure, as illustrated above,
Lovecraft often seemed to be on the fence when it came to his
nothingness 
 59
convictions about the value of existence. In a letter to Edwin
Baird, the first editor of Weird Tales, he penned some remarks
that express a univocal stand by a pessimist who is estranged
from all solace known to ordinary folk. These merit quotation
at length.
Popular authors do not and apparently cannot appreciate the fact
that true art is obtainable only by rejecting normality and conventionality in toto, and approaching a theme purged utterly of any
usual or preconceived point of view. Wild and "different" as they
may consider their quasi-weird products, it remains a fact that the
bizarrerie is on the surface alone; and that basically they reiterate
the same old conventional values and motives and perspectives.
Good and evil, teleological illusion, sugary sentiment, anthropocentric psychology-the usual superficial stock in trade, and all
shot through with the eternal and inescapable commonplace ....
Who ever wrote a story from the point of view that man is a
blemish on the cosmos, who ought to be eradicated? As an example-a young man I know lately told me that he means to write a
story about a scientist who wishes to dominate the earth, and who
to accomplish his ends trains and overdevelops germs ... and leads
armies of them in the manner of the Egyptian plagues. I told him
that although this theme has promise, it is made utterly commonplace by assigning the scientist a normal motive. There is nothing
outre about wanting to conquer the earth; Alexander, Napoleon,
and Wilhelm II wanted to do that. Instead, I told my friend, he
should conceive a man with a morbid, frantic, shuddering hatred
of the life-principle itself, who wishes to extirpate from the
planet every trace of biological organism, animal and vegetable
alike, including himself. That would be tolerably original. But after
all, originality lies with the author. One can't write a weird story
of real power without perfect psychological detachment from the
human scene, and a magic prism of imagination which suffuses
theme and style alike with that grotesquerie and disquieting distortion characteristic of morbid vision. Only a cynic can create
horror-for behind every masterpiece of the sort must reside a
driving demonic force that despises the human race and its illusions, and longs to pull them to pieces and mock them. 
60 
The salient interest of this letter is that it shows Lovecraft as a
perfectionist of cosmic disillusion. But relatively dissociated
from Lovecraft the cosmic disillusionist was another Lovecraft,
one who reveled in protectionist illusions that could not be
more alien to the propensities of his alter ego. In this latter
identity, he took refuge from what he specified as his cynicism
(also "cosmic pessimism") in a world of distractions and anchorings he had amassed over the years. Among them was his
sentimental immersion in the past. Especially dear to him was
the traditional way of life emblemized by architectural remnants of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century New England.
Old towns with winding streets, houses with semicircular
fanlight doors, and other postcard images of Y ankeedom conjured up for Lovecraft a picture of bygone times as an aesthetic
phenomenon that often tailed into a Blood-and-Soil mysticism.
A proud Novanglian, Lovecraft grew up and lived among
abundant reminders of a past he idealized. His attachment to
historic New England counterbalanced his infatuation with the
far reaches of time and space, beside which, as he well knew,
the outdated culture-streams that so enraptured him were local,
fleeting, and accidental forms without immanent virtue. For
Lovecraft, both quaint small-paned windows and a bracing
alienage from human mores had charms that he heartily honored in his works as well as his life, even during his darkest days
of cynicism and pessimism.
Like most of us, Lovecraft distracted himself with fabricated values, and he did so until death was bestowed upon him
by a combination of intestinal cancer and Bright's disease. Concerned as a fiction writer with smashing to bits humanity's
grand illusion about its place in the universe, Lovecraft welcomed any illusions he could accept in good faith, as did Zapffe
and Schopenhauer, who also pursued gratifying diversions that
took their minds off what the latter philosopher called the 

"vanity and suffering of life." During his later years, Lovecraft
did seem to mellow considerably as he walked the plank into
nonexistence. In letters to his friends and colleagues he attested
that he had left his cynicism and pessimism behind and had become an "indifferentist," meaning one who sees no malice in the
physical universe but only a flux of particles. To the benefit of
supernatural horror aficionados, Lovecraft's indifferentist philosophy did not require him to discontinue writing about pernicious things that compromise the sanity of anyone who learns
of their existence. Lovecraft was exhilarated by the idea of
something pernicious that made a nightmare of our world,
whether it was indifferent to us or quite partial to our devastation. In his indifferentism, Lovecraft did not seem to have
shambled far from the cognitive-style of the individual who advised his friend to write about "a man with a morbid, frantic,
shuddering hatred of the life-principle itself, who wishes to extirpate from the planet every trace of biological organism, animal and vegetable alike, including himself." If only there were a
man who could bring to fruition such a wish. Then the earth
could finally be "cleared off," as Wilbur Whately wrote in his
diary in "The Dunwich Horror."
Why anyone should be drawn to the writings of Lovecraft
and his confederates is usually expounded as a natural aspect of
the human temper, a healthy yearning of our souls to exceed
the bounds of ordinary existence. In his lecture "On Morbidity,"
part of a series of brief expositions on supernatural horror, an
academician known only as Professor Nobody (an ostentatiously cocky pseudonym) submits his analysis of an atypical
individual who does not partake in the wholesome motivation
of the majority with respect to the horrific and extraordinary, "a
man with a morbid, frantic, shuddering hatred of the lifeprinciple itself." While there is indeed something invigorating in
supernatural horror for this individual, it is a negative rather 

than a positive activation that pleasures him by its antipathy to
all that lives. The floor is now ceded to the professor.
Isolation, mental strain, emotional exertions, visionary infatuations, well-executed fevers, repudiations of well-being: only a few
of the many exercises practiced by that specimen we shall call the
"morbid man." And our subject of supernatural horror is a vital
part of his program. Retreating from a world of heath and sanity,
or at least one that daily invests in such commodities, the morbid
man seeks the shadows behind the scenes of life. He backs himself
into a corner alive with cool drafts and fragrant with centuries of
must. It is in that corner that he builds a world of ruins out the
battered stones of his imagination, a rancid world rife with things
smelling of the crypt.
But this world is not all a romantic sanctum for the dark in
spirit. So let us condemn it for a moment, this deep-end of dejection. Though there is no name for what might be called the morbid man's "sin," it still seems in violation of some deeply ingrained
morality. The morbid man does not appear to be doing himself or
others any good And while we all know that melancholic moping
and lugubrious ruminating are quite palatable as side-dishes of existence, he has turned them into a house specialty1 Ultimately,
however, he may meet this charge of wrongdoing with a simple
"What of it?"
Now, such a response assumes morbidity to be a certain class
of vice, one to be pursued without apology, and one whose advantages and disadvantages must be enjoyed or endured outside the
law. But as a sower of vice, if only in his own soul, the morbid
man incurs the following censure: that he is a symptom or a cause
of decay within both individual and collective spheres of being.
And decay, like every other process of becoming, hurts everybody.
"Good1" shouts the morbid man. "No good1" counters the crowd
Both positions betray dubious origins: one in resentment, the
other in fear. And when the moral debate on this issue eventually
reaches an impasse or becomes too tangled for truth, then psychological polemics can begin. Later on we will find other angles from
which this problem may be attacked, enough to keep us occupied
for the rest of our lives. 

Meanwhile, the morbid man keeps putting his time on earth to
no good use, until in the end-amidst mad winds, wan moonlight,
and pasty specters-he uses his exactly like everyone else uses
theirs: all up.
Undoing Ill
When people are asked to respond to the statement "I am
happy-true or false," the word "true" is spoken more often
than "false," overwhelmingly so. If there is some loss of face in
confessing that one is not happy, this does not mean that those
who profess happiness as their dominant humor are lying
through their teeth. People want to be happy. They believe
they should be happy. And if some philosopher says they can
never be happy because their consciousness has ensured their
unhappiness, that philosopher will not be part of the dialogue,
especially if he blathers about discontinuing our species by
ceasing to bear children who can also never be happy even
though, to extend the point, they can also never be unhappy
given their inexperience of existing. Ask Zapffe.
So you ask whether I would choose to be unborn? One must be
born in order to choose, and the choice involves destruction. But
ask my brother in that chair over there. Indeed, it is an empty one;
my brother did not get so far. Yet ask him, as he is traveling like
the wind below the sky, crashing against the beach, scenting in the
grass, reveling in his strength as he pursues his living food Do you
think he is bereaved by his incapacity to fulfill his fate on the waiting list of the Oslo Housing and Savings Society? And have you
ever missed him? Look around in a crowded afternoon tram and
reflect whether you would allow a lottery to select one of the exhausted toilers as the one whom you put into this world. They pay
no attention as one person gets off and two get on. The tram keeps
rolling along. ("Fragments of an Interview," Aftenposten, 1959)
The point that in the absence of birth nobody exists who can be
deprived of happiness is terribly conspicuous. For optimists, this 

fact plays no part in their existential computations. For pessimists, however, it is axiomatic. Whether a pessimist urges us to
live "heroically" with a knife in our gut or denounces life as not
worth living is immaterial. What matters is that he makes no
bones about hurt being the Great Problem it is incumbent on
philosophy to observe. But this problem can be solved only by
establishing an imbalance between hurt and happiness that
would enable us in principle to say which is more desirable-­
existence or nonexistence. While no airtight case has ever been
made regarding the undesirability of human life, pessimists still
run themselves ragged trying to make one. Optimists have no
comparable mission. When they do argue for the desirability of
human life it is only in reaction to pessimists arguing the opposite, even though no airtight case has ever been made regarding
that desirability. Optimism has always been an undeclared policy
of human culture--one that grew out of our animal instincts to
survive and reproduce--rather than an articulated body of
thought. It is the default condition of our blood and cannot be
effectively questioned by our minds or put in grave doubt by our
pains. This would explain why at any given time there are more
cannibals than philosophical pessimists.
For optimists, human life never needs justification, no matter
how much hurt piles up, because they can always tell themselves that things will get better. For pessimists, there is no
amount of happiness-should such a thing as happiness even
obtain for human beings except as a misconception-that can
compensate us for life's hurt. As a worst-case example, a pessimist might refer to the hurt caused by some natural or humanmade cataclysm. To adduce a hedonic counterpart to the horrors that attach to such cataclysms would require a degree of
ingenuity from an optimist, but it could be done. And the reason it could be done, the reason for the eternal stalemate be-
 65
tween optimists and pessimists, is that no possible formula can
be established to measure proportions and types of hurt and
happiness in the world. If such a formula could be established,
then either pessimists or optimists would have to give in to
their adversaries.
One formula to establish the imbalance at issue has been
tendered by the South African philosopher of ethics David Benatar. In his Better Never to Have Been: The Hann of Coming into
Existence (2006)1 Benatar cogently propounds that, because some
amount of suffering is inevitable for all who are born, while the
absence of happiness does not deprive those who would have
been born but were not, the scales are tipped in favor of not
bearing children. Therefore, propagators violate any conceivable
system of morality and ethics because they are guilty of doing
harm. To Benatar, the extent of the harm that always occurs
matters not. Once harm has been ensured by the begetting of a
bundle of joy, a line has been crossed from moral-ethical behavior to immoral-unethical behavior. This violation of morality and
ethics holds for Benatar in all instances of childbirth.
People like Benatar who argue that the world's "ideal population size is zero" are written off as being unhealthy of mind.
Further accentuating this presumed unhealthiness is Benatar's
argument that giving birth is not only harmful but should be
seen as so egregiously harmful that there is no happiness that
can counterbalance it. As harms go in this world, there are none
worse than the harm that entails all others. Ask William James
for a perspective on one of those great harms-to which he
gives the name "melancholy"-and how it is generally passed
over in the lives of healthy adults.
The method of averting one's attention from evil, and living simply in the light of good is splendid as long as it will work. It will
work with many persons; it will work far more generally than
most of us are ready to suppose; and within the sphere of its successful operation there is nothing to be said against it as a religious 
66 
solution. But it breaks down impotently as soon as melancholy
comes; and even though one be quite free from melancholy one's
self, there is no doubt that healthy-mindedness is inadequate as a
philosophical doctrine, because the evil facts which it refuses
positively to account for are a genuine portion of reality; and they
may after all be the best key to life's significance, and possibly the
only openers of our eyes to the deepest levels of truth.
The normal process of life contains moments as bad as any of
those which insane melancholy is filled with, moments in which
radical evil gets its innings and takes its solid turn. The lunatic's
visions of horror are all drawn from the material of daily fact. Our
civilization is founded on the shambles, and every individual
existence goes out in a lonely spasm of helpless agony. If you
protest, my friend, wait until you arrive there yourself. (The
Varieties of Religious Experience, 1902)
James himself suffered a brush with melancholy, but he made a
full recovery and began to think positively, or at least equivocally,
about being alive, answering yes to the question "Is life worth living?" However, by force of his honesty of intellect he knew this
opinion needed to be defended as much as any other opinion. No
logic can support it. Indeed, logic defeats all feeling that life is
worth living, which, James says, only a self-willed belief in a
higher order of existence can instill. Then every suffering will
seem worthwhile in the way that the vivisection of a living dog,
to use James's example, would seem worthwhile to the animal if
only it could comprehend the goodly ends its pain serves for the
higher order of human existence. In his lecture "Is Life worth Living," James opined that human beings, unlike dogs, can in fact
imagine a higher order of existence than theirs, one that may legitimate the worst adversities of mortal life. James was a rare philosopher in that he put no faith in logic. And he was doubtless
wise to adopt that stance, since the fortunes of those who attempt to defend their opinions with logic are not enviable.
Naturally, for those whose opinion is that it is "better to be"
than "better never to have been," Bena tar's logic for the latter 

proposition is rejected as faulty, the more so in that its conclusions are not supported by a consensus of ordinary folk. Logic
notwithstanding, Benatar's moral-ethical censure of reproduction does prove that humanity's continuance is not universally
accepted as a good in itself, even in a super-modern world. It
also reminds us that no one can make a case that every individual's birth, or any individual's birth, is a good in itself. And that
is the case that needs to be made, at least morally and ethically
speaking as well as logically speaking. (For more on this, see the
section Pressurized in the chapter "The Cult of Grinning Martyrs.") If most people believe that being alive is all right-the
alternative to this belief having no appeal for them-the rectitude of causing new people to become alive is just a matter of
opinion.
Repression
In "The Last Messiah," Zapffe wrote: "The whole of living that
we see before our eyes today is from inmost to outmost enmeshed in repressional mechanisms, social and individual; they
can be traced right into the tritest formulas of everyday life."
The quartet of formulas that Zapffe picked out as individual and
social mechanisms of repression are probably the most trite he
could have chosen, which may have been deliberate on his part
because they are so familiar to us and so visible in our day-today existence. These mechanisms are related to the psychoanalytic theory of unconscious repression, although they are also
perilously accessible to the conscious mind. And when they are
accessed, no one can concede them with impunity. Not overweight persons or tobacco users, who must play dumb when
they are scarfing down a cupcake or smoking a cigarette. Not
soldiers fighting a war, who must not be aware they are risking
their lives and limbs for a rationalization-their country, their
god, etc. Not anyone who is going to suffer and die (that is, eve-
68 
ryone), who will not voluntarily confess to playing the same old
games for as long as possible rather than be haunted by thoughts
of mortality and the unpleasantness that may precede it. And
definitely not artists, who keep their aesthetic distance for fear
of being hamstrung by the realities they "bring to life."
Once the facts that repressional mechanisms hide are accessed, they must be excised from our memory-or new repressional mechanisms must replace the old-so that we may
continue to be protected by our cocoon of lies. If this is not
done, we will be whimpering misereres morning, noon, and
night instead of chanting that day by day, in every way, we are
getting better and better. Although we may sometimes admit
to the guileful means we use to keep us doing what we do, this
is only a higher level of self-deception and paradox, not evidence that we stand on the heights of some meta-reality where
we are really real. We say we know what is in store for us in
this life, and we do. But we do not know. We cannot if we are
to survive and multiply.
Annotating humanity's attempt to bluff itself in the interest of
the species is an extensive literature on self-deception, denial,
and repression.10 Naturally, none of those working in this area
of study believe human life to be such a morass of selfdeception, denial, and repression that we do not know which
way is up. But in Zapffe's analysis of self-deception, denial, and
repression, we cannot know which way is up without paying
dearly for this knowledge. Enough of us must addle our consciousness so that we can be far less conscious than we might,
which is the tragedy of the human species, for anyone who
might have forgotten. Those who cannot pull this off will suffer
the consequences.
Some who study self-deception, denial, etc. believe these
are healthy practices if they facilitate our happiness without in-
 69
fringing on the happiness of our fellows. They speak of selfdeception, denial, etc. as "useful fictions" or "positive illusions"
and ballyhoo them as staples for both the individual and society. (For his book Vital Lies, Simple Truths: The Psychology of
Self-Deception [1996], Daniel Goleman studied how people and
groups play along with factitious designs to scotch the animus
and anxiety that would be loosed if an etiquette of honesty
were somehow enforced.) Others believe that self-deceptive
practices are too complex to be usefully analyzed. This does not
mean that self-deceptive practices do not support heinous acts
by the ingenious denial of these acts (Stanley Cohen, States of
Denial: Knowing about Atrocities and Suffering, 2001); it only
means that we cannot know how self-deception works in these
cases. Finally, many of those who study self-deception believe
we are not capable of self-deception because we cannot both
consciously know something and consciously not know it, for
this would involve us in a paradox.
However, others have reasoned their way around this supposed paradox. An example of such reasoning is presented by
Kent Bach ("An Analysis of Self-Deception," Philosophy and
Phenomenal Research, 1981), who offers three means of avoiding unwanted thoughts that are nevertheless accessible to a subject's consciousness: rationalization, evasion, and jamming.
These are identical to the methods of isolation, anchoring, and
distraction spotted by Zapffe in human life. Each may keep a
subject in a state of self-deception regarding what is really the
case. Bach's essay does not, of course, extend his three categories of self-deception to the entire human species, as does Zapffe. To Zapffe, we remember, we are all by nature and necessity
false and paradoxical beings and should terminate our existence
as strangers to reality who cannot live as we are and cannot live
otherwise, who must constrain our consciousness because,
tragically, our sanity depends on it. 

In his Why We Lie: The Evolution of and the Unconscious Mind (2007)1 David Livingstone Smith examines the
mechanisms of self-deception and denial, both individual and
social, in terms of evolutionary psychology. This approach leads
him to a conclusion about these mechanisms that is compatible
with Zapffe's diagnosis of humanity as a paradox. Smith's thesis
is that at some time in the remote past the human mind split
into the dual levels of conscious and unconscious processes the
better to deceive itself and others for the purpose of adaptation.
This makes Smith's hypothesis about the process of denial tantamount to that of the psychoanalytic theory of repression, by
which individuals deny unpalatable facts about themselves to
themselves, and, by extension, to others. Smith is in fact a psychoanalyst, and this may be seen in his statement that the "everpresent possibility of deceit is a crucial dimension of every human relationship, even the most central: our relationship with
our very selves." To practice this deceit, one must repress consciousness of the deceiving, which does not exclude selfdeception concerning consciousness itself and what it discloses
about human life. Effectively, then, Smith is allied with Zapffe's
position that the human being
performs ... a more or less self-conscious repression [Zapffe's emphasis] of its damning surplus of consciousness. The process is virtually constant during our waking and active hours, and is a
requirement of social adaptability and of everything commonly referred to as healthy and normal living.
Psychiatry even works on the assumption that the "healthy"
and viable is at one with the highest in personal terms. Depression, "fear of life," refusal of nourishment and so on are invariably
taken as signs of a pathological state and treated thereafter. Often,
however, such phenomena are messages from a deeper, more immediate sense of life, bitter fruits of a geniality of thought or feeling at the root of anti-biological tendencies. It is not the soul being
sick, but its protection failing, or else being rejected because it is
experienced-correctly-as a betrayal of ego's highest potential.
Deception 
 71
Even though Zapffe regarded psychoanalysis as another form of
anchoring, whether or not a repressional mechanism is accessible to our consciousness or is wholly unconscious seems a trivial point. For both Smith and Zapffe, they lead to the same
thing: occlusion of the real. Another thing Smith and Zapffe
share is that their ideas about humankind are not scientifically
verifiable and will not be for some time to come, if ever. And
without proof on a platter, anyone whose ideas are unpalatable
to scientists, philosophers, and average mortals must expect to
be poorly heard. Smith does not seem to understand this, and in
the closing pages of his book expresses hope that humanity will
one day "get real," as the saying goes. At the end of "The Last
Messiah," Zapffe expressed an unconditional pessimism that
this could ever happen, which was patently the only reasonable
attitude for him to take. Smith himself might consider "getting
real" about his hope we will ever get real, given that humanity
will always have its reasons for being repressed, self-deceptive,
and unreal. A utopia in which we no longer deny the realities
we presently must repress cannot be realistically hoped for.
And who except a pessimist would wish for that utopia?
The effectiveness of conscious repressional mechanisms has
been analyzed from many angles, particularly in relation to the
fear of death. An enumeration of traditional strategies for grappling with thanatophobia appears in Choices for Living: Coping
with the Fear of Dying (2002) by Thomas S. Langer. Although
the subtitle of this book suggests that it concentrates on the
fear of dying, it is more about the fear of death, not about the
suffering and terror that may attend either a short-lived or a
dawdling migration into death. Factually, Langer's book, like
many others of its kind, is fixated on living rather than on either
death or dying, which seem to be only blurry contingencies
while an individual is alive. 
72 
DOCTOR: "I'm afraid you have an inoperable tumor and haven't
long to live."
PATIENT: "That can't be. I feel in perfect health."
POLICE OFFICER: 'Tm sorry to inform you, ma'am, that your
husband has been involved in a vehicular misadventure. He's
dead."
WIFE : "That can't be. He just left the house ten minutes ago."
Given a little time, of course, the cancer patient and the woman
who just lost her husband come around to their respective realities. Acceptance of one's new condition, as opposed to going
mad or reacting in some other pathological manner, seems to be
the usual process-on the condition, naturally, that an individual
lives long enough to accept it and does not die of an inoperable
tumor first. In the media and all forms of entertainment, such
bad breaks are exposed to us all our lives. But we still do not
heed the old saw "Hope for the best, but expect the worst." Instead, we hope for the best and think we have a very good
chance of getting it. If we really expected the worst, we might
well go mad or react in some other pathological manner before
the worst came for us and ours. And that really would be the
worst.
Suffering I
For almost all philosophers who write about death, the subject
is studied in the abstract, with the unsightly tangibles at its bedside either bracketed or shrugged off. If dying is even given the
time of day by philosophers, it must be studied as a subcategory of SUFFERING, THE MEANING O F, which few thinkers
discuss outside of moral philosophy and ethics, relatively soft
cognitive pastimes when placed beside logic, epistemology, ontology, etc. Philosophies that take human suffering as their
overarching subject are given short shrift by analytic types, who 
 73
leave SUFFERING, THE MEANING OF to religions such as Buddhism and Christianity, or to pessimists. Unless a philosopher is
prepared to go all the way with it, ·
to take a hard line on its
relevance to the whole of human life, as did Schopenhauer and
a few other relics of the pre-modern era, he will balk at saying
anything about suffering.
One who did not balk entirely was the Austrian-born British philosopher Karl Popper, who in The Open Society and Its
Enemies (1945) did have a thing or two to say about human suffering. Briefly, he revamped the Utilitarianism of the nineteenth-century British philosopher John Stuart Mill, who
wrote: "Actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote
happiness, wrong as they tend to promote the reverse of happiness." Popper remolded this summation of a positive utilitarianism into a negative utilitarianism whose position he handily
stated as follows: "It adds to clarity in the fields of ethics, if we
formulate our demands negatively, i.e. if we demand the
elimination of suffering rather than the promotion of
happiness." Taken to its logical and most humanitarian conclusion, Popper's demand can have as its only end the elimination
of those who now suffer as well as "counterfactual" beings who
will suffer if they are born. What else could the "elimination of
suffering" mean if not its total abolition, and ours? Naturally,
Popper held his horses well before suggesting that to eliminate
suffering would demand that we as a species be eliminated. But
as R. N. Smart famously argued (Mind, 1 958)1 this is the only
conclusion to be drawn from Negative Utilitarianism.
In "The Last Messiah," Zapffe is not sanguine about eliminating suffering, nor is he so unworldly as to beseech a communal solution for its elimination by snuffing out the human race,
as did the Cathari and the Bogomils. (He does lash out at the
barbarism of social or religious proscription of suicide, but he is
not a standard-bearer for this form of personal salvation.) To 
74 
reiterate with due compunction, Zapffe's thought is foremost
an addendum to that of various sects and individuals who have
resolved that conscious existence is so odious that extinction is
preferable to survival. It also has the value of advancing a new
answer to an old question: "Why should generations unborn be
spared entry into the human thresher?" But what might be
called "Zapffe's Paradox," in the tradition of possessively named
formulations that saturate primers of philosophy, is as useless as
the propositions of any other thinker who is pro-life or anti-life
or is only juggling concepts to clinch what is reality and can we
ever get there. That said, we can continue as if it had not been
said. The measure of a philosopher's thought is not in its answers or the problems it poses, but in how well it fiddles with
these answers and problems such that they animate the minds
of others. Thus the importance-and the nullity-of rhetoric.
Ask any hard-line pessimist, but do not expect him to expect
you to take his words seriously.
Suffering II
Perhaps the greatest strike against philosophical pess1m1sm is
that its only theme is human suffering. This is the last item on
the list of our species' obsessions and detracts from everything
that matters to us, such as the Good, the Beautiful, and a Sparkling Clean Toilet Bowl. For the pessimist, everything considered in isolation from human suffering or any cognition that
does not have as its motive the origins, nature, and elimination
of human suffering is at base recreational, whether it takes the
form of conceptual probing or physical action in the world-for
example, delving into game theory or traveling in outer space,
respectively. And by "human suffering," the pessimist is not
thinking of particular sufferings and their relief, but of suffering
itself. Remedies may be discovered for certain diseases and sociopolitical barbarities may be amended. But these are only 
 75
stopgaps. Human suffering will remain insoluble as long as human beings exist. The one truly effective solution for suffering is
that spoken of in Zapffe's "Last Messiah." It may not be a welcome solution for a stopgap world, but it would forever put an
end to suffering, should we ever care to do so. The pessimist's
credo, or one of them, is that nonexistence never hurt anyone
and existence hurts everyone. Although our selves may be illusory creations of consciousness, our pain is nonetheless real.
As a survival-happy species, our successes are calculated in
the number of years we have extended our lives, with the reduction of suffering being only incidental to this aim. To stay alive
under almost any circumstances is a sickness with us. Nothing
could be more unhealthy than to "watch one's health" as a means
of stalling death. The lengths we will go as procrastinators of that
last gasp only demonstrate a morbid dread of that event. By contrast, our fear of suffering is deficient. So Shakespeare's Edgar
when he passes on the wisdom that "the worst is not I So long as
we can say 'This is the worst."' Officially, there are no fates worse
than death. Unofficially, there is a profusion of such fates. For
some people, just living with the thought that they will die is a
fate worse than death itself.
Longevity is without question of paramount value in our
lives, and finding a corrective for mortality is our compulsive
project. Anything goes insofar as lengthening our earthly tenure.
And how we have cashed in on our efforts. No need to cram
our lives into two or three decades now that we can cram them
into seven, eight, nine, or more. The lifespan of nondomesticated mammals has never changed, while ours has
grown by leaps and bounds. What a coup for the human race.
Unaware how long they will live, other warm-blooded life
forms are sluggards by comparison. Time will run out for us as it
does for all creatures, true, but at least we can dream of a day
when we might elect our own deadline. Then perhaps we can all 

die of the same thing: a killing satiation with our durability in a
world that is MALIGNANTLY USELESS.
"Worthless" rather than "useless" is the more familiar epithet
in this context. The rationale for using "useless" in place of
"worthless" in this histrionically capitalized phrase is that
"worthless" is tied to the concepts of desirability and value, and
by their depreciation introduces them into the existential mix.
"Useless," on the other hand, is not so inviting of these concepts.
Elsewhere in this work, "worthless" is connected to the language
of pessimism and does what damage it can. But the devil of it is
that "worthless" really does not go far enough when speaking
pessimistically about the character of existence. Too many times
the question "Is life worth living?" has been asked. This usage of
"worth" excites impressions of a fair lot of experiences that are
arguably desirable and valuable within limits and that may follow upon one another in such a way as to suggest that life is not
totally worthless. With "useless," the wispy spirits of desirability
and value do not as readily rear their heads. Naturally, the uselessness of all that is or could ever be is subject to the same repudiations as the worthlessness of all that is or could ever be. For
this reason, the adverb "malignantly" has been annexed to "useless" to give it a little more semantic stretch and a dose of toxicity. But to express with any adequacy a sense of the uselessness
of everything, a nonlinguistic modality would be needed, some
effusion out of a dream that amalgamated every gradation of the
useless and wordlessly transmitted to us the inanity of existence
under any possible conditions. Indigent of such means of communication, the uselessness of all that exists or could possibly
exist must be spoken with a poor potency.
Not unexpectedly, no one believes that everything is useless, and with good reason. We all live within relative frameworks, and within those frameworks uselessness is far wide of
the norm. A potato masher is not useless if one wants to mash 
 77
potatoes. For some people, a system of being that includes an
afterlife of eternal bliss may not seem useless. They might say
that such a system is absolutely usef�l because it gives them the
hope they need to make it through this life. But an afterlife of
eternal bliss is not and cannot be absolutely useful simply because you need it to be. It is part of a relative framework and
nothing beyond that, just as a potato masher is only part of a
relative framework and is useful only if you need to mash potatoes. Once you had made it through this life to an afterlife of
eternal bliss, you would have no use for that afterlife. Its job
would be done, and all you would have is an afterlife of eternal
bliss-a paradise for reverent hedonists and pious libertines.
What is the use in that? You might as well not exist at all, either in this life or in an afterlife of eternal bliss. Any kind of existence is useless. Nothing is self-justifying. Everything is
justified only in a relativistic potato-masher sense.
There are some people who do not get up in arms about potato-masher relativism, while other people do. The latter want to
think in terms of absolutes that are really absolute and not just
absolute potato mashers. Christians, Jews, and Muslims have a
real problem with a potato-masher system of being. Buddhists
have no problem with a potato-masher system because for them
there are no absolutes. What they need to realize is the truth of
"dependent origination," which means that everything is related
to everything else in a great network of potato mashers that are
always interacting with one another. So the only problem Buddhists have is not being able to realize that the only absolutely
useful thing is the realization that everything is a great network
of potato mashers. They think that if they can get over this
hump, they will be eternally liberated from suffering. At least
they hope they will, which is all they really need to make it
through this life. In the Buddhist faith, everyone suffers who
cannot see that the world is a MALIGNANTLY USELESS po-

tato-mashing network. However, that does not make Buddhists
superior to Christians, Jews, and Muslims. It only means they
have a different system for making it through a life where all we
can do is wait for musty shadows to call our names when they
are ready for us. After that happens, there will be nobody who
will need anything that is not absolutely useless. Ask any atheist.
Ecocide
Despite Zapffe's work as a philosopher, although not in an occupational role (he earned his living by writing poems, plays,
stories, and humorous pieces), he is better known as an early
ecologist who popularized the term "biosophy" to name a discipline that would broaden the compass of philosophy to include
the interests of other living things besides human beings. In this
capacity, he serves as an inspiration to environmentalists who
worry about the well-being of the earth and its organisms.
Here, too, we catch ourselves-and Zapffe himself, as he affirmed-in the act of conspiring to build barricades against the
repugnant facts of life by signing on to a cause (in this case that
of environmentalism) that snubs the real issue. Vandalism of
the environment is but a sidebar to humanity's refusal to look
into the jaws of existence.
In truth, we have only one foot in the natural environment
of this world. Other worlds are always calling us away from nature. We live in a habitat of unrealities-not of earth, air, water, and wildlife--and cradling illusion trounces grim logic
every time. Some of the more combative environmentalists,
however, have concurred with Zapffe that we should retire
from existence. But their advocacy of worldwide suicide as a
strategy for saving the earth from being pillaged by human beings receives no mention in "The Last Messiah" and was probably not on Zapffe's mind when he wrote this essay. As
appealing as a universal suicide pact may be, why take part in it 
 79
just to conserve this planet, this dim bulb in the blackness of
space? Nature produced us, or at least subsidized our evolution.
It intruded on an inorganic wasteland and set up shop. What
evolved was a global workhouse where nothing is ever at rest,
where the generation and discarding of life incessantly goes on.
By what virtue, then, is it entitled to receive a pardon for this
original sin-a capital crime in reverse, just as reproduction
makes one an accessory before the fact to an individual's death?
In its course, nature has made blunders in plenty. These are left
to die out, as is nature's wont. Perhaps this will be how we will
go-a natural death. It might be idly theorized, though, that nature has a special plan for human beings and devised us to serve
as a way revoking itself, much like Mainlander's self-expunging
God. An offbeat idea, no protest, but not the strangest we have
ever heard or lived by. We could at least take up the hypothesis
and see where it leads. If it is proved unviable, then where is the
harm? But until then, might we not let ourselves be drawn along
by nature's plan, which includes our sacking the earth as a paradoxical means of living better in it, or at least living as our nature
bids us to live.
We did not make ourselves, nor did we fashion a world that
could not work without pain, and great pain at that, with a little
pleasure, very little, to string us along-a world where all organisms are inexorably pushed by pain throughout their lives to do
that which will improve their chances to survive and create
more of themselves. Left unchecked, this process will last as long
as a single cell remains palpitating in this cesspool of the solar
system, this toilet of the galaxy. So why not lend a hand in nature's suicide? For want of a deity that could be held to account
for a world in which there is terrible pain, let nature take the
blame for our troubles. We did not create an environment uncongenial to our species, nature did. One would think that nature 
80 
was trying to kill us off, or get us to suicide ourselves once the
blunder of consciousness came upon us. What was nature thinking? We tried to anthropomorphize it, to romanticize it, to let it
into our hearts. But nature kept its distance, leaving us to our
own devices. So be it. Survival is a two-way street. Once we settle ourselves off-world, we can blow up this planet from outer
space. It's the only way to be sure its stench will not follow us.
Let it save itself if it can-the condemned are known for the acrobatics they will execute to wriggle out of their sentences. But if
it cannot destroy what it has made, and what could possibly unmake it, then may it perish along with every other living thing it
has introduced to pain. While no species has given in to pain to
the point of giving up its existence, so far as we know, it is not a
phenomenon whose praises are often sung.
Hopelessness
In Zapffe's "The Last Messiah," the titular figure appears at the
end and makes the mock-Socratic, biblically parodic pronouncement, "Know yourselves-be infertile and let the earth be
silent after ye" (Zapffe's emphasis). As Zapffe pictures the scene,
the Last Messiah's words will not be well received: "And when
he has spoken, they will pour themselves over him, led by the
pacifier makers and the midwives, and bury him in their fingernails." Semantically speaking, the Last Messiah is not a messiah,
since he saves no living soul and will be erased from human
memory by a vigilante group whose kingpins are "the pacifier
makers and the midwives." Moreover, a resurrection seems to be
the last thing in the Last Messiah's future.
To exposit why humanity should not further tarry on earth is
one thing; to believe that this proposition will be agreeable to
others is quite another. Due to the note of hopelessness in the
coda to Zapffe's essay, we are discouraged from imagining a world
in which the self-liquidation of humanity could ever be put into 

effect. The Norwegian himself did not take the trouble to do so
in "The Last Messiah." No reason he should, since he would first
have to imagine a new humanity, which is not as a practice done
outside of fiction, a medium of realism but not of reality.
Yet these new humans would not have to be super-evolved
or otherwise freakish organisms living far in the future. They
would only have to be like Zapffe in recognizing that a retreat
from the worldly scene would be a benevolent proceeding for
the good of the unborn. Becoming extinct would seem to be a
tall order, but not one that would be insurmountably timeconsuming. Zapffe optimistically projected that those of the
new humanity could be evacuated from existence over the
course of a few generations. And indeed they could. As their
numbers tapered off, these dead-enders of our species could be
the most privileged individuals in history and share with one
another material comforts once held in trust only for the wellborn or money-getting classes of the world. Since personal economic gain would be passe as a motive for the new humanity,
there would be only one defensible incitement to work: to see
one another through to the finish, a project that would keep
everyone busy and not just staring into space while they waited
for the end. There might even be bright smiles exchanged
among these selfless benefactors of those who would never be
forced to exist. And how many would speed up the process of
extinction once euthanasia was decriminalized and offered in
humane and even enjoyable ways?
What a relief, what an unburdening to have closed the book
on humankind. Yet it would not need to be slammed shut. As
long as we progressed toward a thinning of the herd, couples
could still introduce new faces into the human fold as billions
became millions and then thousands. New generations would
learn about the past, and, like those before them, feel lucky not
to have been born in times of fewer conveniences and cures, 

although they might still play at cowboys and Indians, cops and
robbers, management and labor. The last of us could be the
very best of us who ever roamed the earth, the great exemplars
of a humanity we used to dream of becoming before we got
wise to the reality that we are just a mob always in the market
for new recruits.
Quite naturally, this depiction of an end times by an extinctionist covenant will seem abhorrent to those now living in
hope of a better future (not necessarily one in which glorious
progress has been made toward the alleviation of human misery, but at least one that will partially exculpate them from a
depraved indifference to the harm predestined for their young) .
It may also seem a romanticized utopia, since those who predict major readjustments in humanity's self-conception (Karl
Marx, et al.) often believe that a revolution in ethics will blossom when their "truths" are instituted. Worse, or perhaps better
if the solution to human suffering is to be final, the idea of a
new humanity may be a smokescreen for a tyrannical oligarchy
run by militants of extinction rather than a social and psychological sanctuary for a species harboring the universal goal of
delimiting its stay on earth. If Zapffe uselessly exercised himself
by formulating the thesis of "The Last Messiah," he was sharp
enough to give it a hopeless finale. Without an iota of uncertainty, humankind is and will always be unsuited to take charge
of its own deliverance. The delusional will forever be with us,
thereby making pain, fear, and denial of what is right in front of
our face the preferred style of living and the one that will be
passed on to countless generations.
The reception of the research of a Canadian scientist named
Michael Persinger may be seen as an indication of humanity's
genius for keeping itself locked into its old ways. In the 1 980s,
Persinger modified a motorcycle helmet to affect the magnetic 

fields of the brain of its wearer, inducing a variety of strange
sensations. These included experiences in which subjects felt
themselves proximate to supernatural phenomena that included ghosts and gods.
Atheists used Persinger's studies to nail closed their argument for the subjectivity of anyone's sense of the supernatural.
Not to be left behind, believers wrote their own books in
which they contended that the magnetic-field-emitting motorcycle helmet proved the existence of a god that "hard-wired"
itself into our brains. A field of study called neurotheology grew
up around this and other laboratory experiments. Even if you
can prop up a scientific theory with a cudgel of data that
should render the holy opposition unconscious, they will be
standing ready to discredit you-imprisonment, torture, and
public execution having gone the way of chastity belts.
For writers of supernatural horror the perquisite of this
deadlock is that it ensures the larger part of humanity will remain in a state of fear, because no one can ever be certain of either his own ontological status or that of gods, demons, alien
invaders, and sundry other bugbears. A Buddhist would advise
that we forget about whether or not the bogeymen we have invented or divined are real. The big question is this: Are we real?
Debatabi I ity
Even though Zapffe's theory is perceptible in our lives, we do
not actually have any sense, or any strong sense, that human beings are false and paradoxical beings, at least not yet. And if we
did, why would that mean we should go extinct and not continue to live as we have all these years? One would think that
neuroscientists and geneticists would have as much reason to
head for the cliffs because little by little they have been finding
that much of our thought and behavior is attributable to neural
wiring and heredity rather than to personal control over the in-

dividuals we are, or think we are. But they do not feel suicide to
be mandatory just because their laboratory experiments are informing them that human nature may be nothing but puppet
nature. Not the slightest tingle of uncanniness or horror runs up
and down their spines, only the thrill of discovery. Most of them
reproduce and do not believe there is anything questionable in
doing so. If they could get a corpse to sit up on an operating table, they would jubilantly exclaim, "It's alive]" And so would
we. Who cares that human beings evolved from slimy materials?
We can live with that, or most of us can. Actually, we can
probably live with any conception of ourselves for quite a while
longer. Although we may have phases in which the power of
positive thinking peters out, no scientific discoveries or anything
else can get to us for long, at least not as far as we can see into
the future. As a species with consciousness, we do have our inconveniences. Yet these are of negligible importance compared
to what it would be like to feel in our depths that we are nothing but human puppets-things of mistaken identity who must
live with the terrible knowledge that they are not making a go of
it on their own and are not what they once thought they were.
At this time, barely anyone can conceive of this happening--of
hitting bottom and finding to our despair that we can never
again resurrect our repressions and denials. Not until that day of
lost illusions comes, if it ever comes, will we all be competent
to conceive of such a thing. But a great many more generations
will pass through life before that happens, if it happens. 
WHO GOES THE RE?
Uncanniness I
No philosopher has ever satisfactorily answered the following
question: "Why should there be something rather than nothing?"
It seems a fair enough question on its face. But that it should
even be asked may seem to some of us as inexplicable, even
preposterous. What the question suggests is our uneasiness with
Something. Alternatively, there is nothing troubling about
Nothing, because we cannot give it consideration. Something allows or necessitates our experience of the uncanny. Whether we
are speaking of something that evolved naturally or was made
by the digits and opposing thumbs of humanity, whether it is
animate or inanimate, that something may become uncanny to
us, a contravention of what we think should or should not be.
In the same way that most of us share a general pattern of
feeling about what is right or wrong in a moral sense, we also
share a general pattern of feeling about what is right or wrong
with respect to the world and ourselves-an internal authority
that judges entities and events as within or outside of customs
of reality. In experiencing the uncanny, there is a feeling of
wrongness. A violation has transpired that alarms our internal
authority regarding how something is supposed to happen or
exist or behave. An offense against our world-conception or
self-conception has been committed. Of course, our internal authority may itself be in the wrong, perhaps because it is a fabrication of consciousness based on a body of laws that are written
85 
86 
only within us and not a detector of what is right or wrong in
any real sense, since nothing really is right or wrong in any real
sense. That we might be wrong about something being wrong
would in itself be wrong according to our internal authority,
which would then send out a signal of the uncanny concerning
its own wrongness that would be returned to it for another
round of signaling on the principle that everything it knows is
wrong, which is to say that Something is always wrong. For the
welfare of our functioning, however, we are insured against the
adverse effects of an ever-cycling signal of uncanny wrongness
by our inability to recognize it, although it might be going on all
the time, thus accounting for our uneasiness about Something.
But we may still perceive other phenomena to be on the wrong
side of right and wrong-things that should not happen or exist
or behave in the way we feel they should.
Even the most unexceptional things may impress us in this
way. In no time at all they may cease to be seen the way we usually see them and come to be seen as something else, something
we may not be able to name. This unsteadiness of quality and
meaning in something-a puppet doll, for instance-repels our
lasting inspection of it, for the longer this inspection goes on the
more we become lost in a paradoxical state of knowing and not
knowing what was once known and familiar. And it is then that
the question "Why should there be something rather than nothing?" may become lost in the inexplicable, even preposterous,
ambition to resolve it without losing our minds to the uncanny.
Everyday objects seem curiously liable to being perceived as
uncanny, because we see them every day and "know" how they
should be and should not be. One day those shoes on the floor
of your clothes closet may attract your eye in a way they never
have before. Somehow they have become abstracted from your
world, appearances you cannot place, lumps of matter without a
fixed quality and meaning. You feel confused as you stare at 

them. What are they? What is their nature? Why should there
be something rather than nothing? But before your consciousness can ask any more questions, you dial it back so that your
footwear seems familiar again and not uncanny in its being. You
select a pair of shoes to wear that day and sit down to put them
on. It is then that you notice the pair of stockings you are wearing and think of the feet they conceal . . . and the rest of the
body to which those concealed feet are connected . . . and the
universe in which that body is roving about with so many other
uncanny shapes. "What now?" a voice from the other side of being seems to say. And what if you should look at yourself-the
most everyday object there is-and feel at a loss to attach a
quality and a meaning to what is being seen or what is seeing it.
What now indeed.
Uncanniness II
A sense of the uncanny can be activated in the average mortal
under various conditions. Principal among these conditions are
those which cause us to feel that we are not what we think we
are, which was touched on at the close of the previous section.
In his groundbreaking essay "On the Psychology of the Uncanny"
(1906), the German physician and psychologist Ernst Jentsch
analyzes this feeling and its origins. Among the examples of uncanny experience Jentsch proffers in his essay is one where individuals cease to appear integrated in their identity and take on
the aspect of mechanisms, things of parts that are made as they
are made and are all clockwork processes rather than immutable
beings unchanging at their heart. As Jentsch explains:
[A] confirmation of the fact that the emotion being discussed [the
uncanny] is caused in particular by a doubt as to the animate or
inanimate nature of things--or, expressed more precisely, as to
their animatedness as understood by man's traditional view-lies
in the way in which the lay public is generally affected by the 
88 
sight of articulations of most mental and many nervous diseases.
Several patients afflicted with such troubles make a quite decidedly uncanny impression on most people.
What we can always assume from our fellow men's experience
of ordinary life is the relative psychical harmony in which their
mental functions generally stand in relation to each other, even if
moderate deviations from this equilibrium make their appearance
occasionally in almost all of us: this behavior ... constitutes man's
individuality and provides the foundation for our judgment of it.
Most people do not show strong psychical peculiarities. At most,
such peculiarities become apparent when strong affects make
themselves felt, whereby it can suddenly become evident that not
everything in the human psyche is of transcendental origin, and
that much that is elementary is still present within it even for our
direct perception. It is of course often in j ust such cases that much
at present is generally accounted for quite well in terms of normal
psychology.
But if this relative psychical harmony happens markedly to be
disturbed in the spectator, and if the situation does not seem trivial or comic, the consequence of an unimportant incident, or if it
is not quite familiar (like an alcohol intoxication, for example),
then the dark knowledge dawns on the unschooled observer that
mechanical processes are taking place in that which he was previously used to regarding as a unified psyche. It is not unj ustly that
epilepsy is therefore spoken of as the morbus sacer ["sacred disease"], as an illness not deriving from the human world but from
foreign and enigmatic spheres, for the epileptic attack of spasms
reveals the human body to the viewer-the body that under normal conditions is so meaningful, expedient, and unitary, functioning according to the directions of his consciousness-as an
immensely complicated and delicate mechanism. This is an important cause of the epileptic fit's ability to produce such a demonic effect on those who see it. (Translation by Roy Sellars)
The brilliance of Jentsch's example is that it explicates the uncanny not as an objective quality of something in the outside
world, but as a subjective experience of a perceiver of the outside world. This is how it is in real life: The uncanny is an effect 
 89
of our minds-and nothing else. And yet, at least for the average onlooker in this case, the uncanny effectively originates in
an objective stimulus, something that seems to have about it a
power of its own. In the example given, the objective stimulus
is an animate individual observed as behaving against "animatedness as understood by man's traditional view," the offender
here being an epileptic exhibiting unusual bodily motions in the
midst of a seizure. The subjective reaction to the seemingly objective stimulus of the uncanny is the gaining of "dark knowledge" about the workings of individuals, including the onlooker
of the epileptic in the midst of a seizure. More expansively
stated, not only is the epileptic perceived as uncanny by the
onlooker (unless the onlooker is a physician who understands
epileptic seizures by the lights of modern medicine and not according to a "traditional view") but the onlooker also perceives
himself as uncanny because he has been made conscious of the
mechanical nature of all human bodies and, by extrapolation, of
the fact that "mechanical processes are taking place in that
which he was previously used to regarding as a unified psyche."
Neuroscientists are now familiar with some of these mechanical
processes, as was Zapffe, who wrote in "The Last Messiah": "All
things chain together in causes and effects, and everything
[man] wants to grasp dissolves before the testing thought. Soon
he sees mechanics even in the so-far whole and dear, in the
smile of his beloved." The knowledge that we are not the idealized beings we thought, integral and undivided, does frighten
some people, including physicians and neuroscientists. Yet even
though we are not as we usually perceive ourselves to be, we
can still continue in our accustomed ways if only we can quash
the sense of being uncanny mechanisms in a world of things
that may be transformed anytime and anywhere. Such quashing
is not often a problem in the so-called real world. But it must be
a problem in the world of supernatural horror. 
go 
Artistic invocations of horror are most successful when the
phenomena they depict call up the uncanny, which, unlike
Jentsch's example of seeing someone having an epileptic seizure, are genuinely threatening both from the outside and from
within. This species of horror can only be provoked when the
supernatural is conjoined with the uncanny, because not even
physicians and neuroscientists can be comfortable with supernaturalism, either by the lights of modern medicine or by any
other lights. Bloodthirsty vampires and ravenous zombies are
prime examples in this context, because their intrinsic supernaturalism as the undead makes them objectively uncanny
things that generate subjectively uncanny sensations. They are
uncanny in themselves because they once were human but
have undergone a terrible rebirth and become mechanisms with
a single function-to survive for survival's sake. Necessarily,
they also inspire a subjective sense of the uncanny in those who
perceive them because they divulge the "dark knowledge" that
human beings are also things made as they are made and may
be remade because they are only clockwork processes, mechanisms, rather than immutable beings unchanging at their heart.
As uncanny mechanisms, vampires and zombies usually perform the mechanical act of reproduction with no weighty deliberation, or none at all-the replication their kind being
epiphenomena! to the controlling urge that drives them. This
second consequence completes the requirements of a supernatural horror story to present a phenomenon that poses an uncanny threat from both outside and from within, which is the
ultimate threat to ordinary folk who only want to live in a
world and in a way that is natural and familiar to them and
their families, even though they are darkly aware that this familiarity is a fabrication that may be invalidated.
Both requirements of the uncanny are recognizable in such
horror films as Invasion of the Body Snatchers (1956; remakes 
 91
1 978 and 2007) and John Carpenter's The Thing (1 982) , which
belong only negligibly to the genre of science fiction and solidly
to that of supernatural horror as cognate with the uncanny. In
the former classic of cinema, human beings are replaced by
physical doubles of themselves by an alien power-something
pernicious, in Jentsch's analysis of the lay person's perception of
epilepsy, "not deriving from the human world but from foreign
and enigmatic spheres." What business does this alien power
have on our planet? It has come to protract the survival of its
kind by recreating itself in our image. And that says all we need
to know about its mechanics and intentions: They are the same
as ours, only they threaten to replace the survival and reproduction of our species with the survival and reproduction of theirs.
The methodology of this alien power is to make duplicates of
us after we fall asleep, so that we will never again awaken as
ourselves but will be transformed into another sort of being altogether. Due to these transformations, everyone who has not
been taken by the Body Snatchers suffers from two appalling
uncertainties. One is that any other person may not be what
they seem to be--human. The other is that they themselves
will also be transformed once they go to sleep. But unlike becoming a vampire or a zombie, neither being a desirable state of
being, our transformation into Body Snatchers, which, despite
the pluralization in the film title, seem to be parts of a hive
rather than uniquely individuated entities, does not look too
bad, objectively speaking. Once absorbed by the alien power,
the converted lose all the qualities they had as humans except
for one--that of contentment, or happiness if you like. They
become quietists in their existence, which in the film appears
the last thing that human beings want, preferring the agitations
of the life they know. This reaction is understandable. No one
wants to be other than they are, or think they are. That is a fate
worse than death: the transformation in which you stop being 
92 
you. And better to die than to live in an assimilated condition,
even one that is permanently collected and reassuring rather
than vulnerable to the startling and dreadful. Our sense of the
uncanny is too ingrained in us as beings that may not be what
we think we are, but who will hold on for dear life to survive
and reproduce as our own species and not that of some alien
power.
John Carpenter's The Thing is quite similar in its ontological
scheme to Invasion of the Body Snatchers. The motivations of the
Thing are the same as those of the Body Snatchers-to survive
and reproduce. Only its method is different, which results in a
somewhat greater degree of uncanniness in this film than in the
earlier one. Because the title creature has the ability to remake itself as any and all life forms without their knowledge, the characters in the film cannot be sure who is a "thing" and who is not,
since those who are transmuted retain their former appearance,
memories, and behaviors even after they have become, in their
essence, uncanny monstrosities from another world This situation
leaves the members of an Antarctic research station-in the vicinity of which the Thing's spacecraft crash-landed long ago-­
doubtful about which of them is a thing and which are still the
individuals they seem to be. Naturally, those at the Antarctic station are invested in repressing any consciousness that they are
things, just as those who witness someone in the midst of an epileptic seizure are invested in thinking they are not things of parts
that are made as they are made and are all clockwork processes
rather than immutable beings unchanging at their heart. By isolation (putting this possibility out of their minds), the latter can
maintain their sense of being idealized beings, integral and undivided, and not mechanisms-human puppets who do not know
themselves as such. They can also distract themselves from any
petrifying news about human beings by watching films in which
all of the characters suffer an uncanny doom that could not possi-
 93
bly have relevance to real life, since it is represented as an invasion from "foreign and enigmatic spheres" they believe have no
place in our world, where we know who we are and who everyone else is-members of a species that exists to survive and reproduce, ordinary folk who have nothing to do with
supernaturalism and the uncanny and who are resistant to the
pessimism of fictions like Invasion of the Body Snatchers and The
Thing, whose principals all suffer death or deformation in their
fight to hang on to their lives and their humanity.
In protest to the mentality of ordinary folk, let us again call
on the incorrigibly pixilated Professor Nobody. In his "Pessimism and Supernatural Horror-Lecture One," he accommodates us with a rejoinder to the average, optimistic mortal and
helps us recall some of the main themes of the present work.
Madness, chaos, bone-deep mayhem, devastation of innumerable
souls-while we scream and perish, History licks a finger and
turns the page. Fiction, unable to compete with the world for vividness of pain and lasting effects of fear, compensates in its own
way. How? By inventing more bizarre means to outrageous ends.
Among these means, of course, is the supernatural. In transforming natural ordeals into supernatural ones, we find the strength to
affirm and deny their horror simultaneously, to savor and suffer
them at the same time.
So it is that supernatural horror is a possession of a profoundly
divided species of being. It is not a property held by even our
closest relations in the wholly natural world. We came into it, as
part of our gloomy inheritance, when we became what we are.
Once awareness of the human predicament was achieved, we
immediately took off in two directions, splitting ourselves down
the middle. One half became dedicated to apologetics, even celebration, of our new toy of consciousness. The other half condemned and occasionally launched direct assaults on this "gift."
Supernatural horror was one of the ways we found that would
allow us to live with our double selves. By its employ, we discovered how to take all the things that victimize us in our natural
lives and turn them into the very stuff of demonic delight in our 
94 
fantasy lives. In story and song, we could entertain ourselves with
the worst we could think of, overwriting real pains with ones that
were unreal and harmless to our species. We can also do this trick
without trespassing on the real estate of supernatural horror, but
then we risk running into miseries too close to home. While horror may make us squirm or quake, it will not make us cry at the
pity of things. The vampire may symbolize our horror of both life
and death, but none of us has ever been uprooted by a symbol.
The zombie may conceptualize our sickness of the flesh and its
appetites, but no one has ever been sickened to death by a concept. By means of supernatural horror we may pull our own
strings of fate without collapsing-natural-born puppets whose
lips are painted with our own blood.
Actors
Within the strictures of commonsense reality and personal ability, we can choose to do anything we like in this world ... with
one exception: We cannot choose what any of our choices will
be. To do that, we would have to be capable of making ourselves into self-made individuals who can choose what they
choose as opposed to being individuals who simply make
choices. For instance, we may want to become bodybuilders
and choose to do so. But if we do not want to become bodybuilders we cannot make ourselves into someone who does
want to be a bodybuilder. For that to happen, there would have
to be another self inside us who made us choose to want to become bodybuilders. And inside that self, there would have to
be still another self who made that self want to choose to
choose to make us want to become bodybuilders. This sequence of choosing, being interminable, would result in the
paradox of an infinite number of selves beyond which there is a
self making all the choices. The foregoing position is based in a
strain of philosophical thought called determinism and is here
stated in one of its strongest forms. British philosopher Galen 
 95
Strawson describes this position, which is his own as a determinist, as pessimistic. ("Luck Swallows Everything," Times Literary
Supplement, June 28, i 998.) It is pessimist because it turns the
human image into a puppet image. And a puppet image of humanity is one of the hallmarks of pessimism.
Those who most vehemently oppose the pessimistic form
of determinism are libertarian indeterminists. They hold that
we have absolute free will and can make ourselves into individuals who can choose to want to make a certain choice and
not some other. They hold that we are what Michelstaedter despaired we could ever become: individuals who are invulnerably self-possessed and not the products of an indeterminable
series of events and conditions that result in our being able to
make only one choice and not any number of choices, because
factors beyond our control have already taken care of who we
are as individuals and what choices we will finally make.
In the history of philosophical lucubration, arguments for determinism are traditionally the most argued against. Why is this
so, aside from the fact that it turns the human image into a
puppet image? It is so because arguments for determinism step
on the sacrosanct belief in moral responsibility. Even the average atheist draws the line whenever someone says that we do
not have any degree of freedom and that moral responsibility is
not a reality. As die-hard unbelievers, they may reject the position that moral laws descend from a higher plane unperceived
by our senses; as tax-paying citizens, however, they still need to
live by sublunary standards of civility. And this can be done
only if free will and moral realism are the law of the land.
Of course, there are rare cases when a wrongdoer's malfeasance is determined to be the result of determining forces. Then
free will and moral responsibility are waived, and the defendant
is either sent to a psychiatric hospital rather than a prison or 
96 
gets off scot-free because a certain judge and jury in a certain
society temporarily became strong determinists without a sense
of moral realism, thereby turning the human image of a defendant into a puppet image. But this is highly irregular. In the
normal course of events, both determinists and indeterminists
are one in promoting some kind of operative morality. As
guardians of our morale, they feel moral realism to be a necessary truth, whether it is objectively real, as it is to indeterminists, or subjectively "real," as it is to determinists. Without this
truth, or "truth," we could not go on living as we always have
and believe that being alive is all right.
It does not seem wildly improbable that determinations
have been made in our psyches that make some people determinists and others indeterminists. If we could only know how
these determinations work, we would be able to answer the
only interesting question in the debate pitting free will against
determinism: Why argue for one side or the other? The answer
to this question would abort all rivalry in this matter, since it
would bring to light the reason why any philosopher would engage in a conflict more vain than most in his discipline. But
should we ever get an answer to this question, the repercussions would far override matters of moral realism or "realism."
Really, there would only be one repercussion: to reduce all philosophical proclivities to the psychology of the individuals who
exhibit them. In his Metaphilosophy and Free Will (1996)1 Richard Double speaks of analytic philosophers whose writing is
protective of free will.
Although this type of free will writing pays dividends in terms of
precision, it has its disadvantages. First, we may lose sight of the
philosophical forest for the technical trees. Second, and following
from the first, we may collect psychological consolation at the expense of candor. By submerging ourselves in the nuances of theories, we may avert our attention from the big, scary questions. An 
 97
attention to detail can be an exercise in bad faith when it uses up
our time and energies so that we do not bother to question
whether what we are trying to do is possible. Meticulous precision can enable us to remain happy and engaged at the expense of
averting our eyes from the disturbing big picture.
Perhaps one day cognitive psychologists will settle once and for all
why an individual would argue for either free will or determinism. Studies might also be conducted on those who cling to one
side or the other of any philosophical question. This may not advance any philosophical questions, although it might make them
disappear once the argumentative motives behind them have
been determined.
In the everyday world, no such thing as an out-and-out determinist ever existed, since none can shake off a sense of having
free will. The best we can do is to reason that we are determined based on observing the common law of causality among
things in the world and applying this law to ourselves. But we
cannot feel ourselves as determined. (One philosopher has said,
and possibly more have thought to themselves: "Can one really
believe in determinism without going insane?") Being determined in thought and deed is not experientially noticeable, only
abstractly deducible. It would be impossible for someone to say
"I am nothing but a human puppet." The only exception would
be an individual with a psychological disease that had induced
in him the sense of being controlled by an alien force. Should
this individual say "I am nothing but a human puppet," he
would forthwith be marched to the nearest psychiatric hospital,
conceivably overtaken by the horror of feeling he was a human
puppet controlled by an alien force working outside him or
within him or both.
The extent to which any of us is determined in thought and
deed may be logically argued but cannot be known by firsthand experience. Determinists are only too aware that if free 
98 
will is illusory on paper, it is insuperable in our lives. To hate
our illusions or hold them dear only lashes us to them more
tautly. We cannot stand up to them without our world falling
apart, for those who care. And those who really care cannot be
anything but believers in some form of moral realism or "realism," which buttresses the optimistic reality that most people
call home and braces up everything you need in order to be
you-your country, your loved ones, your job or vocation, your
golf clubs, and, in an all around sense, your "way of life."
Impersonation
In the free will debate, the reality, or "reality," of free will is
something of an irrelevancy, since it is a parasite of the feeling
we each have of being or possessing a self (often capitalized).
This self is an intangible entity that is spoken of as if it were an
extra internal organ, yet to every one of us it seems more than
the sum of our anatomical parts. Everything comes back to the
self and must come back to the self, for it is the utmost issue in
our deciding whether we are something or nothing, people or
puppets. Without the sense of being or possessing a self, there
would be no use disputing whether or not we are free, determined, or somewhere in between. Why we have a sense of self
has been variously explained. (For one explanation, see the next
section in this chapter.) Having this sense is what brings the
free-will-versus-determinism debate to the table. Even further,
it is what brings everything to the table, or at least to the table
of human existence, because nothing else that exists has a sense
of being a self that can do or not do anything at will.
You can reason that you do not have a self and that your behavior is determined, but if you feel that you are or possess a
self, then you will probably have a time of it denying responsibility for every thought that passes through your brain or the
slightest movement of your little toe. Yet there is a problem 
 99
with the feeling of responsibility, because sometimes you feel
responsible for something that you cannot, by any logic or
physical law, be held responsible for. When someone dies of an
undiagnosed case of liver cancer not long after he punches you
in the stomach, you cannot say, "That's what he gets for messing
with me." Yet people do say such things in such circumstances.
Nevertheless, they can usually be brought to their senses about
feeling somehow responsible for the death by unrelated causes
of someone who has punched them in the stomach.
More often, though, an individual cannot be brought to his
senses when he feels responsible for something that he cannot,
by any logic or physical law, be held responsible for. For example, you call up a friend or a relative to help you fix your toilet,
and while driving over to your place to do this he is hit by an
eighteen-wheel truck and dies. It would not be out of the ordinary if you felt responsible for your friend or relative's death for
the reason that if you had not called him up to help fix your toilet he would not have been on the road at that time and gotten
killed in a collision with an eighteen-wheel truck. Under these
circumstances, your friends and relatives who are still alive may
find it difficult to convince you of your non-responsibility in the
death of your friend or relative who died in a vehicular misadventure. There may be any number of factors involved in that
fatal collision, but you could still feel that the only factor worth
consideration was your calling up your friend or relative to drive
over to your place when he would otherwise have been doing
something you had nothing to do with. You would be mistaken
to feel this way, of course, but just because you can reason that
you are mistaken would not in itself make you feel any less responsible for what happened. And you may mistakenly take that
feeling of terrible responsibility to your grave, because you were
the self who called another self to come to your place to help fix
your toilet. You might just as well blame your toilet for going 
100 
out of order when it did, or blame any number of causes back to
the beginning of time as much as blame yourself. The thing is
this: If you can be mistaken in attributing to yourself responsibility, or anything more than a bare trace of causal responsibility,
you can also be mistaken about other things, such as being a self
with free will. But if you feel that you are or possess a self, then
you will probably have a time of it denying responsibility for
every thought that passes through your brain or the slightest
movement of your little toe.
Other people may try to console you for your friend or relative' s death by saying that this atrocious event was not your fault.
They may also surreptitiously blame you for it, as people sometimes blame those who have had a heart attack for being lax in
following the unhealthy injunction to watch your health. But it is
quite possible you will disbelieve anyone who says you are not to
blame for your friend or relative's death in a vehicular misadventure, perhaps because you can tell that they surreptitiously blame
you for it. But that is inconsequential. As someone who feels he
is a self, you will likely as not feel responsible for things you
could not by any logic or physical law take responsibility for, or
no more than a bare trace of causal responsibility. This is not
even to consider circumstances in which you may feel morally
responsible for something that happens when by rights you
should not feel this way. And here is where the feeling of being a
self with free will really comes in.
Say you asked your friend or relative to help fix your toilet
not because you needed help fixing your toilet but because you
wanted to get back at him for asking you to help him move
into his new house the week before when he could have called
a moving company, as you did when you moved into your new
house, and saved you from having your little toe broken when a
heavy piece of furniture fell on it during the move. Morally, inconveniencing your friend or relative just to get back at him for 
 101
the reasons stated in the previous sentence was not the right
thing to do, or so you feel after your friend or relative's car
crashed when it collided with an eighteen-wheel truck in an
explosive vehicular misadventure. You did not mean for that to
happen. You were just looking for some petty form of payback,
some kind of reprisal for the pain of your broken toe--and not
even a proportionate reprisal, nor anything illegal or particularly
immoral, as these things go. Good luck, though, if you try to
feel you were not responsible in an intensely moral sense for
your friend or relative's vehicular misadventure. You could reason that your part in this misfortune was causally determined
and not your fault. But if you feel that you are or possess a self
then you will probably have a time of it denying responsibility
for what happened. If you did not feel this way, what kind of
person would that make you, assuming you still felt yourself a
person and not some monstrous thing?
What is most uncanny about the self is that no one has yet
been able to present the least evidence of it. Like the soul, that
figure of speech which has long since been snickered out of existence, the self may be felt but never be found. It is a spectral
tapeworm that takes its reality from a host organism and grows
along with the physical matter in which it is encased. It may
even grow beyond its material confines. Some believe that a Big
Self enfolds all our little selves. Far fewer, or none, believe that
little selves can have littler selves or play host to a number of
self-contained selves. Do infants have selves? Fetuses? When do
we get a self and can we lose it or have it taken away from us?
Putting nonsense aside, some of us are surer than others of our
selves. And how many of us want nothing so badly as to be a
self-made somebody?
Without a relentless sense of the self, the person, we could
not live as we have all these years. Were a personal god to be 
102 
excluded from everyone's universe, persons would still retain
their status. Sensory perceptions, memories, aches, ecstasies: Because these phenomena occur inside the same sack of skin, we
suppose that we are enduring, continuous entities, things that
serve as the infrastructure for war, romance, athletic competition, and every other genre of human activity. We do not just
have experiences-we own them. That is what it means to be a
person. No quibbling, everyone who is anyone holds this article
of faith, even those who, like the eighteenth-century Scottish
philosopher David Hume, have done a good job of logically
dismantling the reality of selves. But logic cannot exorcise that
"I" (ego) which stares back at you in the mirror, just as logic
cannot remove the illusion of free will. When someone says she
has not been feeling her old self, our thoughts turn to psychology, not metaphysics. To reason or to hold as an article of faith
that the self is an illusion may help us to step around the worst
pitfalls of the ego, but mitigation is light-years from liberation.
To all human beings, or almost all (see the section EgoDeath in this chapter), we seem to be the most real thing going.
No one can say with assurance what the world outside of us is
like, but inside us we feel self-assured. How does this occur? So
far, no one knows. Cognitive psychologists, philosophers of
mind, and neuroscientists have their theories, of course, among
them those that argue for temporary selves and selves over
time, psychophysical selves, neurological selves, objective
selves, subjective selves, social selves, transcendent selves, the
self as a process and not a "thing," the simultaneous existence
and nonexistence of the self. But these and many other selfconcepts leave the self as we have always known and experienced it, intact and unharmed. We will all, or almost all, still
feel that we are or possess an old-fashioned self. Thus, cognitive
psychologists, philosophers of mind, and neuroscientists who
extend theories that the self does not exist as we have always 
 103
believed are not saying that the self does not exist; they are only
spreading complex self-constructions that save the self from
anyone's questioning its existence. And those who try to prove
that selves do not look out at the world from behind our eyeballs might as well be telling us that we have been snatched by
the Body Snatchers or coalesced into the Thing.
Within the hierarchy of fabrications that compose our livesfamilies, countries, gods-the self incontestably ranks highest.
Just below the self is the family, which has proven itself more
durable than national or ethnic affiliations, with these in turn
outranking god-figures for their staying power. So any progress
toward the salvation of humankind will probably begin from
the bottom-when our gods have been devalued to the status
of refrigerator magnets or lawn ornaments. Following the death
rattle of deities, it would appear that nations or ethnic communities are next in line for the boneyard. Only after fealty to
countries, gods, and families has been shucked off can we even
think about coming to grips with the least endangered of fabrications-the self. However, this hierarchy may change in time
as science makes inroads regarding the question of selfhood,
which, if the findings are negative, could reverse the progression, with the extinction of the self foretelling that of families,
national and ethnic affiliations, and gods. After all, the quintessential sequence by which we free ourselves from our selves
and our institutions is still that depicted in the Buddha legend.
Born a prince, so the story goes, the nascent Enlightened One,
Siddhartha Gautama, embarked on a quest to neutralize his ego
by first leaving behind his family, gods, and sociopolitical station-all in one stroke. But Buddha's way requires a near inhuman dedication, and few of us have that kind of stamina. This
being so, a speedy and efficient breakdown of fabrications having a worldwide ambit seems remote without the intercession 
104 
of science, which could at some future date provide a vaccination against the development of "selves" after models already in
use to wipe out certain diseases.
Perhaps the only matter of interest about the self is this:
Whatever makes us think that we are what we think we are
lies in the fact that we have consciousness, which gives us a
sense of being somebody, specifically a human somebody,
whatever that may be, since we do not have a definition of
"human" on which there is universal agreement. But we do
agree that, if only in practice, we are all real-live selves, since
we are all self-conscious. And once we have passed through
every door that qualifies our selves in some way-be it by
name, nationality, occupation, gender, or shoe size--we then
stand before the door of consciousness-parent of all horrors.
And that is all there is to our existence.
No creature caged in a zoo even knows what it is to exist,
nor does it crow about being superior to another kind of thing,
whether animal, vegetable, or mineral. As for us humans, we
reek of our sense of being special. Those hailed as the most conscious among us-the ones needful of a refined type of brainwashing--have made investigations into what it means to be
human. Their divergent ramblings on this subject keep our brains
buzzing while our bodies go the way of surviving and reproducing-being alive that is, since we do not especially consider the
alternative. That being human might mean something very
strange and awful, something quite uncanny, is not given a passing thought. If it were, who knows what would happen to us?
We could disappear in a puff of smoke or fall through a mirror
that has nothing on the other side. Naturally, such possibilities do
not lift our spirits the way we need them to be lifted if we are to
continue to live as we have all these years. 
 105
Non entities
At the forefront of current studies in selfism and egology, the
field of neuroscience has made unmistakable headway. In Being
No One (2004), for example, the German neurophilosopher
Thomas Metzinger provides a theory of how the brain manufactures the subjective sense of our existence as discrete "selves,"
even though, as Metzinger explains, we would be more rigorously categorized as information-processing systems for which it
is expedient in an existential sense to create the illusion of "being
someone." In Metzinger's schema, a human being is not a "person" but a mechanistically functioning "phenomenal self-model"
that simulates a person. The reason we cannot detect these models is that we see through them, and so cannot see the processes
of the models themselves.1 If we could, we would know there is
nothing to us but these models. This might be called "Metzinger's
Paradox": You cannot know what you really are because then
you would know there is nothing to know and nothing to know
it. (What now?) So rather than be know-nothings, we exist in a
condition of what Metzinger describes as "na'ive realism," with
things not being knowable as they really are in themselves, something every scientist and philosopher knows.
The above sketch of Metzinger's central thesis is transparently inadequate, although necessarily so in the present context.
By his reasoning and intuitions concerning the nature and workings of consciousness, Metzinger has no equal in his field and
impresses one as a thinker whose speculative investigations will
someday prove to be the way of reality. By argument and analysis, he has taken consciousness studies as far as possible by the
resources available in the early twenty-first century. The project
Metzinger has taken upon himself is precisely of the kind whose
import is not restricted to the halls of science but is pursued for
the far-reaching implications it may have with regard to the life
of the average mortal. That said, the following discussion of 
106 
Metzinger has an ulterior purpose having little to do with the
value of his theories.
In his essay "The Shadow of a Puppet Dance: Metzinger, Ligotti
and the Illusion of Selfhood" (Collapse IV, May 2008), James
Trafford breaks down Metzinger's Paradox as follows: "The object 'man' consists of tightly packed layers of simulation, for
which naive realism becomes a necessary prophylactic in order
to ward off the terror concomitant with the destruction of our
intuitions regarding ourselves and our status in the world: 'Conscious subjectivity is the case in which a single organism has
learned to enslave itself"' The closing quote from Metzinger's
Being No One might be seen as an extension of Zapffe's Paradox, by dint of which we repress from our consciousness all
that is startling and dreadful in our lives. For Metzinger, this repression takes the form of the aforesaid naive realism, which
masks the single most startling and dreadful revelation for human beings: that we are not what we think we are. Assuaging
our qualms about such a deplorable enlightenment, Metzinger
avers that it is "practically impossible" for us to attain realization of our unreality due to inbuilt manacles of human perception that keep our minds in a dream state.
An interesting fact that seems relevant to Metzinger's study
of the illusion of selves is the following: Metzinger is a lucid
dreamer. His treatise Being No One contains an entire chapter
on the knack of being able to "wake up" in one's dreams and
recognize that one's consciousness is operating within an illusory
zone created by the brain. In that aspect of our lives where we
have no say in what happens and are free to choose nothing, the
lucid dreamer is no one's fool, or at least not his own. He has
peeked behind the curtain of what his consciousness has made
and seen through its tricks and traps. This faculty might very
well explain Metzinger's inquisitiveness about the nature of 
 107
waking perception and the possibility that, as Poe wrote: "All
that we see or seem I Is but a dream within a dream." These
lines sum up the argument of Being No One--that we sleep in
the self and cannot awake. Yet at the close of this 699-page
work, following hard upon an examination of how and why
human beings evolved in such a way that we believe we are
someone while actually being no one, there seems to be some
hedging. "At least in principle," Metzinger writes, "one can wake
up from one's biological history. One can grow up, define one's
own goals, and become autonomous." So imponderably nebulous, the meaning of these sentences can only be guessed at,
since Metzinger leaves them hanging in the air. One is unreservedly stymied as to how this transformation could occur in terms
of Metzinger's theory and research. Did he wrap up his treatise
prematurely? Does he know something he is not telling us? Or
did he just want to end a disillusioning book on an up note?
The same year that he published Being No One, Metzinger
further clouded the issue. In a lecture at the University of California, Berkeley, he referred to our captivity in the illusion of a
self-even though "there is no one" to have this illusion-as
"the tragedy of the ego." This phrase fits like a glove into Zapffe' s theory of consciousness as a tragic blunder. Disappointingly, Metzinger goes on to say that "the tragedy of the ego
dissolves because nobody is ever born and nobody ever dies."
This statement is borrowed from Zen Buddhism (the Heart Sutra) and loses something when translated from a monastery to a
university lecture hall. In traditions of enlightenment, the only
redress for our fear of death is to wake up to our brain's manufactured sense of self and thus eliminate what we mistakenly
think we are before it is too late. But Metzinger's mission as a
scientist-philosopher has been to shed light on the neurological
mechanisms that make this goal unfeasible. Why, then, does
Metzinger speak to his auditors about the "tragedy of the ego," 
108 
which in all probability none of them thought to be a tragedy
before coming to his lecture, and how it "dissolves because nobody is ever born and nobody ever dies"? He seems to be trying
to alleviate any fears they might have about their death at the
same time he is telling them that they do not exist in the first
place. Either way, something is lost that everyone cannot help
wanting to hold on to, tragic as that may be. Metzinger's whole
routine seems to be based in the same kind of paradoxical double-talk that the world already lives by so as to deny the suffering it must endure and to continue to believe that
consciousness is not a problem and that being alive is all right.
But let us not jump to conclusions. In an online forum in
which some of the most prestigious figures in consciousness
studies responded to Nicolas Humphrey's "A Self Worth Having," where, as quoted earlier, Humphrey says that consciousness is a "wonderfully good thing in its own right," Metzinger
sums up his own position on this subject. Here he tolls the
same bell as Zapffe when he writes:
It is not at all clear if the biological form of consciousness, as so far
brought about by evolution on our planet, is a desirable form of
experience, an actual good in itself ...
The theoretical blind spot of current philosophy of mind is the
issue of conscious suffering: Thousands of pages are being written
about color qualia or the contents of thought, but almost no theoretical work is devoted to ubiquitous phenomenal states like human suffering or simple everyday sadness ("subclinical
depression"), or to the phenomenal content associated with panic,
despair and melancholy-let alone to the conscious experience of
mortality or of losing one's dignity ....
The ethical-normative issue is of greater relevance. If one dares
to take a closer look at the actual phenomenology of biological
systems on our planet, the many different kinds of conscious suffering are at least as dominant a feature as are color vision or conscious thought, both of which appeared only very recently.
Evolution is not something to be glorified. One way-out of 
 109
countless others-to look at biological evolution on our planet is
as a process that has created an expanding ocean of suffering and
confusion where there previously was none. As not only the simple number of individual conscious subjects, but also the dimensionality of their phenomenal state-spaces is continuously
increasing, this ocean is also deepening. For me, this is also a strong
argument against creating artificial consciousness: We shouldn't
add to this terrible mess before we have truly understood what
actually is going on here. (Metzinger's emphasis)
Why the disparity in both the tone and substance between
Metzinger's conclusion of his book and Berkeley lecture and his
online exchange with his colleagues? One could speculate that
he felt more comfortable expressing his misgivings about the
evolution of human consciousness in a cyber-convocation of his
peers than in his high-profile opus and public appearances. In
the former outlet, he pulls no punches when he says, "[T]here
are aspects of the scientific world-view which may be damaging
to our mental well-being, and that is what everybody intuitively
feels" (Metzinger's emphasis; quoted in Trafford) . This is a
breathtaking statement for a well-credentialed philosopher to
make (as was his inquiry quoted earlier about whether someone
could really believe in determinism without going insane) .
What else could Metzinger mean by this utterance other than
that well-used caveat of horror fiction that we are in danger of
knowing things we were not meant to know? And the worst possible thing we could know-worse than knowing of our descent from a mass of microorganisms-is that we are nobodies
not somebodies, puppets not people.
In a later book, The Ego Tunnel: The Science of the Mind
and the Myth of the Self (2009), Metzinger confronts the problems involved with breaking the news to the average mortal
that he or she is actually an average phenomenal self-model and
not a person. He wants to assure people that this is not a secret
too terrible to know but a truth that will set us free to be bet-
110 
ter human beings--once we settle on "What is a human being?"
(since to Metzinger we are not what we think we are) and once
we decide "what should a human become?" which is a knotty
issue in light of how this decision should be made and who
should make it. One of Metzinger's fears is that some people
will sink into what he contemns as vulgar materialism" and will
conclude there is nothing for them in this life but survival, reproduction, and death, with the wise guys of the world saying
to themselves in Metzinger's imagined soliloquy: "I don't understand what all these neuroexperts and consciousness philosophers are talking about, but the upshot seems pretty clear to
me. The cat is out of the bag: We are gene-copying bio-robots,
living out here on a lonely planet in a cold and empty physical
universe .... I get the message, and you had better believe I will
adjust my behavior to it." This strategy seems to be that of "heroic pessimists" like Miguel de Unamuno (see above), Joshua
Foa Dienstag (see above), William Brashear (see above), Friedrich Nietzsche (see below), and any number of others who are
already in the know. It is surely the strategy that Zapffe observed everyone to be following, the strategy that we must follow if we are to go on living as paradoxical beings who know
the score but tamp down their consciousness to keep from
knowing it too well. And it works well enough to keep us living as we have all these years. But could the vulgar materialist
actually say that he or she is aware of being no one as a fact and
still go on to pretend that he or she is someone? Would this not
be another version of Metzinger's asking "Can one really believe
in determinism without going insane?" Would such a mental
state not only be "practically impossible" but totally impossible,
just as it would be impossible for someone to say "I am nothing
but a human puppet" and continue to live as he or she had
lived before? It does not seem likely that you could ever see
yourself as what you are per Metzinger. You would then know 
 111
the horror and know that you know it: that you are nothing but
a human puppet would not be impossible to believe. What
now? Answer: Now you go insane. Now our species goes extinct in great epidemics of madness, because now we know that
behind the scenes of life there is something pernicious that
makes a nightmare of our world. Now we know that we are
uncanny paradoxes. We know that nature has veered into the
supernatural by fabricating a creature that cannot and should
not exist by natural law, and yet does.
Metzinger's derision of vulgar materialism seems to rest on
his optimistic belief that a future technology of consciousness
will take us places where the "biological form of consciousness,
as so far brought about by evolution on our planet" has not
taken us. Beautiful and wonderful places, in Metzinger's admittedly well-informed and extraordinarily humane opinion. If we
do not yet know what it is to be human, we have a ballpark
idea of what it is to be humane. And Metzinger's preoccupation
with the suffering of sentient beings matches that of any pessimist. The only difference is in his opinion of how we may
eliminate or greatly ameliorate this suffering. In any event,
while Metzinger has been audacious enough to state that "there
are aspects of the scientific world-view which may be damaging
to our mental well-being, and that is what everybody intuitively
feels," he himself feels that everybody may not always feel that
way and that the risk-benefit calculation will add up in our favor. What
.
else could a neurophilosopher believe--that we
should give up on ourselves and go extinct? Metzinger must
have faith that once the rest of humanity has seen through the
game, we will-in all sincerity and not as pretenders-play
through to a world in which day by day, in every way, we are
getting better and better. But that will take time--lots of it.
Even in the twenty-first century there are people who are
incapable of abiding Darwin's theory unless they can reconcile 
1 1 2 
it with their Creator and His design. Losing hold of these
shielding eidolons would make them honor-bound to become
unhinged, so they might say, because the world as they knew it
would molder away in their palsied arms. Unprepared to receive the evidence, they run from it as any dreamer runs from a
horror at his heels. They think that when this horror closes in
on them they will die of madness to see its shape and know the
touch of what they believe should not be. No doubt they
would survive the experience, as so many have done before
them. We have already weathered torrents of knowledge we
were not meant to know yet were doomed to know. But how
much more can we take? How will the human race feel about
knowing that there is no human race--that there is no one?
Would this be the end of the greatest horror tale ever told? Or
might it be the reinstatement of the way things had been before
we had lives of our own? For now, those who cannot abide
even Darwin's theory without the Creator beside them seem to
be safe. To quote Lovecraft on the subject of forbidden knowledge, "The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have
hitherto harmed us little." But perhaps they will one day. Then
the time may come to engage Zapffe's solution for saving the
future from the curse of consciousness.
While we wait breathlessly for the test results of neuroscientists,
people will still be knocking on your door to hawk some gimmick that will get you into their heaven. Naturally, these salesmen of the sacred do not have a clue regarding what things are
like in heaven. Are there levels of heaven? Could someone be in
heaven and not know it? And how often have we heard that
many who are alive today will not "taste death" but instead will
proceed directly to paradise when the rapture is upon us? This
means that billions have already dropped dead with the unfulfilled hope of not having to suffer the throes of the unsaved. 

What disillusionment must have incommoded them as they lay
in extremis. Death would not be so bad if we could just disappear into it without any irksome preliminaries. But even those
who expect the doors of heaven will open for them would prefer not to make their entrance after the physical trials of fighting
for the life that God gave them. For the rest of us, the carousel of
consciousness spins round and round, enlightening us only to the
bloodcurdling probability that the worst will likely be saved for
last. And even those who experience being alive as quite all right
will have to live through such tacked-on endings as dying in a
vehicular misadventure or lying abed sucking tubes.
Life is like a story that is spoiled by an unsatisfactory resolution of preceding events. There are no retroactive fix-ups for
the corpses we shall become. "All's well that ends well" is well
enough in the short-run. "In the long run," as British economist
John Maynard Keynes reportedly stated, "we are all dead."
This does not sit well with us by way of an ending. But it is
not as if we can choose how things will end for us, or for those
yet unborn.
Unpersons
In his novel translated as Moment of Freedom, which was published ten years before his suicide in 1976, the Norwegian author and cultural critic Jens Bj0rneboe wrote that "he who
hasn't experienced a full depression alone and over a long period of time--he is a child." Aside from being indemonstrable
in its validity, Bjorneboe's bilious discharge is also too restrictive
in esteeming his personal class of suffering as the sole rite of
passage to maturity as a conscious individual. Depression is only
one of the psychopathologies that could be selected to make
the bombastic claim that those who have not been affected by
it in full and over a long period of time belong on a playground
or in a playpen. But it is serviceable as an example of a psycho-

logical disease with which most people have had some experience in one or more of its varieties.
The statistically prevailing form of this disease is "atypical
depression." Less common and more deadly is "melancholic depression." But whatever family name a given case of depression
goes by, it has the same effect: sabotaging the network of emotions that make it seem as if you and your world mean something in some meaningful way. It is then you discover that your
"old self' is not the inviolable thing you thought it was, nor is
the rest of your "old reality." Both are as frail as our bodies and
may be perforated as readily, deflating all that we thought
meaningful about ourselves and our world.
What meaning our lives may seem to have is the work of a
relatively well-constituted emotional system. As consciousness
gives us the sense of being persons, our psychophysiology is responsible for making us into personalities who believe the existential game to be worth playing. We may have memories that
are unlike those of anyone else, but without the proper emotions to liven those memories they might as well reside in a
computer file as disconnected bits of data that never unite into a
tailor-made individual for whom things seem to mean something. You can conceptualize that your life has meaning, but if
you do not feel that meaning then your conceptualization is
meaningless and you are nobody. The only matters of weight in
our lives are colored by rainbows or auroras of regulated emotion which give one a sense of that "old self." But a major depression causes your emotions to evaporate, reducing you to a
shell of a person standing alone in a drab landscape. Emotions
are the substrate for the illusion of being a somebody among
somebodies as well as for the substance we see, or think we see,
in the world. Not knowing this ground-level truth of human existence is the equivalent of knowing nothing at all.
Although varying in intensity and nature, our emotions must 

seem ever-stable in their concatenation, just as a mixed drink
must be made with specific ingredients in the same relative
amounts so that they may blend into a vodka martini or a piiia
colada. United, our emotions ostensibly form a master self to
which anomalous secondary selves may be compared for quality.
Even as they are ever trading places or running together within
us, clearly cut or amorphous, the experience of these biological
twitterings makes it nearly impossible to doubt that they will
stay with us as far as we can see into the future. Ask any couple
who cannot imagine being without each other, a vital fiction
without which, besides the fact that it often leads to procreation,
no society could exist. It would have no reason to do so, because
reason is merely the mouthpiece of emotion. Hume, who specialized in detaining his readers with obvious but unspoken realities, wrote in his Treatise of Human Nature (1739-40) that
"reason is and ought only to be the slave of the passions." To free
reason from this slavery would mean our becoming rationalists
without a cause, paralytics crippled by mentation.
In speaking of depression and its defining effect of driving
its victim to the point of caring nothing for anything, the
American talk-show host Dick Cavett once remarked that
"when you're downed by this affliction, if there were a curative
magic wand on the table eight feet away, it would be too much
trouble to go over and pick it up." No better elucidation has
ever been proffered vis-a-vis the uselessness of reason in the absence of emotion. In the recumbence of depression, your information-gathering system collates its intelligence and reports
to you these facts: (1) there is nothing to do; (2) there is nowhere to go; (3) there is nothing to be; (4) there is no one to
know. Without meaning-charged emotions keeping your brain
on the straight and narrow, you would lose your balance and
fall into an abyss of lucidity. And for a conscious being, lucidity
is a cocktail without ingredients, a crystal clear concoction that 
116 
will leave you hung over with reality. In perfect knowledge
there is only perfect nothingness, which is perfectly painful if
what you want is meaning in your life.
William S. Burroughs said it rightly in his journals. Using his
streetwise voice, he wrote: "Love? What is it? The most natural
painkiller what there is." You may become curious, though, about
what happened to that painkiller should depression take hold and
expose your love--whatever its object-as just one of the many
intoxicants that muddled your consciousness of the human tragedy. You may also want to take a second look at whatever struck
you as a person, place, or thing of "beauty," a quality that lives
only in the neurotransmitters of the beholder. (Aesthetics? What
is it? A matter for those not depressed enough to care nothing
about anything, that is, those who determine almost everything
that is supposed to matter to us. Protest as you like, neither art
nor an aesthetic view of life are distractions granted to everyone.)
In depression, all that once seemed beautiful, or even startling and
dreadful, is nothing to you. The image of a cloud-crossed moon is
not in itself a purveyor of anything mysterious or mystical; it is
only an ensemble of objects represented to us by our optical apparatus and perhaps processed as a memory.
This is the great lesson the depressive learns: Nothing in the
world is inherently compelling. Whatever may be really "out
there" cannot project itself as an affective experience. It is all a
vacuous affair with only a chemical prestige. Nothing is either
good or bad, desirable or undesirable, or anything else except
that it is made so by laboratories inside us producing the emotions on which we live. And to live on our emotions is to live arbitrarily, inaccurately-imparting meaning to what has none of
its own. Yet what other way is there to live? Without the everclanking machinery of emotion, everything would come to a
standstill. There would be nothing to do, nowhere to go, nothing
to be, and no one to know. The alternatives are clear: to live 
 117
falsely as pawns of affect, or to live factually as depressives, or as
individuals who know what is known to the depressive. How
advantageous that we are not coerced into choosing one or the
other, neither choice being excellent. One look at human existence is proof enough that our species will not be released from
the stranglehold of emotionalism that anchors it to hallucinations. That may be no way to live, but to opt for depression
would be to opt out of existence as we consciously know it.
Of course, individuals may recover from depression. But in
that event they had better keep their consciousness of what
they went through at heel. Otherwise they might start thinking
that being alive is not as all right as they once thought it was
when they were being shuttled about by a relatively wellconstituted emotional system. The same applies to bodily systems of any kind, such as the immune system. Because when
one of your systems goes haywire, you cannot function as you
think you should. You may not even be able to think about
anything except how much vomit, nasal mucus, phlegm, and
watery stool you are discharging from your body when your
immune system cannot withstand an onslaught from a viral or
bacterial infection. If that is the way you were all the time, you
could not go on as a well-constituted being, which means you
could not go on as your old self, whatever that might have
been. But chances are you will get better after one or more of
your systems has gone haywire, and as a newly well-constituted
being you will probably think, 'Tm back to being the real me."
However, you might as truthfully think that the real you is the
one who was sick, not the one with well-constituted systems
working together so cooperatively that you do not even notice
them. You cannot go around thinking that the sick you is the
real you, though, or you would turn into someone who suffers
from chronic anxiety about all the ways your systems can go
haywire. And that would become the real you. 
FREAKS OF SALVATI ON
Down-Going
"Depressing" is the adjective that ordinary folk affix to the lifeperspectives expressed by men such as Zapffe, Schopenhauer, and
Lovecraft. The doctrines of world-class religions, dolorous as they
may be, will never be thus defamed, because they are perceived
to be "uplifting" by ordinary folk. Panglossian falsehoods convene
the crowd; discouraging truths disperse it. The reason: It is depression not madness that cows us, demoralization not insanity
that we dread, disillusionment of the mind not its derangement
that imperils our culture of hope. An epidemic of depression
would quiet those chattering voices in our heads, stopping life
dead in its tracks. Providentially, we are endowed with enough
manic enthusiasm to keep us plowing onward and making more
of ourselves, bragging all the while about what billions of years of
evolution have bidden every species to do anyway.
Zapffe, Schopenhauer, and Lovecraft fared well enough
without surrendering themselves to life-affirming hysterics.
This is a risky thing for anyone to do, but it is even more risky
for writers, because anti-vital convictions will demote their
work to a lower archive than that of wordsmiths who capitulate to positive thinking, or at least follow the maxim of being
equivocal when speaking of our species. Everyone wants to
keep the door open on the possibility that our lives are not
MALIGNANTLY USELESS. Even highly educated readers do
not want to be told that their lives are an evolutionary contin1 19 
120 
gency-and nothing else--and that meaning is not what people
think it means.1
For Schopenhauer, the fallout from his negations has been
that he takes up far less floor space in the museum of modem
thought than does his fellow German and antagonist Friedrich
Nietzsche. Schopenhauer promises nothing but extinction for
the individual following the postmortem recall of his "true nature" as a tiny parcel of the personless and ever-roiling Will.
Nietzsche borrows from religion and sermonizes that, although
we will not be delivered into the afterlives of his ecclesiastic
models, we must be willing in spirit to reprise this life again and
again to its tiniest detail for all etemity.2 As unappealing as repeating our lives even once may seem to some of us, we are not
the ones who make a writer's reputation. This is the bailiwick of
philosophical trendsetters, who discovered in Nietzsche the most
spellbinding conundrum in the history of the mind. All the better for the perseverance of his corpus, which has supplied his
exegetes with lifetimes of interpretation, argumentation, and
general schismatic disharmony-all the purposeful activities that
any religionist, with or without a deity, goes for.
Among other things, Nietzsche is famed as a promoter of
human survival, just as long as enough of the survivors follow
his lead as a peroerted pessimist-one who has consecrated himself to loving life exactly because it is the worst thing imaginable, a sadomasochistic joyride through the twists and turns of
being unto death. Nietzsche had no problem with human existence as a tragedy born of consciousness-parent of all horrors.
This irregular pessimism is the antinomy of the "normal" pessimism of Schopenhauer, who is philosophy's red-headed stepchild because he is unequivocally on record as having said that
being alive is not-and can never be--all right. Even his most
admiring commentators, who do not find the technical aspects
of his output to be off-putting, pull up when he openly waxes 
 121
pessimistic or descants on the Will as an unself-consciously stern
master of all being, a cretinous force that makes everything do
what it does, an imbecilic puppeteer that sustains the ruckus of
our world. For these offenses, his stature is rather low compared
to that of other major thinkers, as is that of all philosophers who
bear an unconcealed grudge against life.
Although both Schopenhauer and N ietzsche spoke only to
an audience of atheists, Schopenhauer erred-from a public relations stance--by not according human beings any special
status among the world of things organic and inorganic or
trucking in any meaning to our existence. Contra Schopenhauer, Nietzsche not only took religious readings of life seriously enough to deprecate them at great length, but was hellbent on replacing them with goal-oriented values and a sense of
meaning that even nonbelievers beg for like dogs-some project in which individuals may lose (or find) themselves.
Key to Nietzsche's popularity with atheistic amoralists is his
materialistic mysticism, a sleight of mind that makes the
world's meaninglessness into something meaningful and refashions fate into freedom before our eyes. As for Schopenhauer's
cattle-drive existence in which an unknowable force (the Will)
herds us along-that had to go. In the form of a diverting fiction, it might well be worth its conceptual weight in shivers of
uncanny horror; but as a proposed reality, it is self-evidently
depressing.
In confederacy with those whom he believed himself to
have surpassed in the race toward an undefined destiny,
Nietzsche did what he could to keep the human pageant strolling toward ... wherever. Even though he had the clarity of
mind to recognize that values did not grow on trees nor were
writ on stone tablets, he duped himself into thinking that it was
possible to create them. But how these values would be created
and what they would be he could not say. After demolishing 
122 
the life-rejecting faith of the Crucified, Nietzsche handed down
his own commandments through the Antichrist-like messiah
Zarathustra, who was groomed to take over Christianity's administration of the W estem world and keep it afloat with
counterfeit funds. Carrying around a sackload of unrealities
from here to the eternal return, perhaps no one has ever been
as "normal" as Nietzsche.
Why did this nay-saying yes-man believe it was so important to keep up our esprit de corps by fending off the crisis of
nihilism he predicted as forthcoming? Nietzsche could not have
thought that at some point people were going to tum their
heads to the wall due to a paucity of values, which may run
low sometimes but will never run out. Those who were supposed to have gone running into the streets in a funk of foundationlessness have survived without a hitch: Nihilistic or not,
they still carried home an armful of affirmations. To publish or
perish is not a question that professional thinkers have to think
about for long. And whatever moral crisis lies ahead will have
to take place in an environment undamaged by nihilism.
As a threat to human continuance, nihilism is as dead as
God. (See James E. Edwards, The Plain Sense of Things: The
Fate of Religion in the Age of Nonnal Nihilism, 1997.) To do
away with one's values is rather impossible, an ideal to be imagined until one is seized by a natural end. Schopenhauer, a virtuoso of life's devaluation, knew that. But Nietzsche fretted about
those unborn values he imagined his work would inspire, worrying over them as would an expectant parent concerned that
his name, his blood, and his codes both moral and genetic be
bodied forth by generations fading over the hills of time. Leaving no values that posterity could not cook up on its own,
Nietzsche was withal an admirable opponent of enslaving values from the past. In their place, he left nothing. And for that
we should thank him. 
 123
Possibly stolen from Nietzsche is what has been tagged as Zapffe's Paradox-where human beings deceive themselves into
thinking their lives are something they are not, namely, worth
living. In his Birth of Tragedy (1 872)1 Nietzsche wrote:
It is an eternal phenomenon: The insatiable will always find a way,
by means of an illusion spread over things, to detain its creatures in
life and to compel them to live on. One is chained by the Socratic
joy of knowing and the delusion of being able thereby to heal the
eternal wound of existence; another is ensnared by art's seductive
veil of beauty fluttering before his eyes; yet another by the metaphysical consolation that beneath the whirl of appearances eternal
life flows on indestructibly-to say nothing of the more common
and almost more forceful illusions the will has at hand at every
moment. (The Birth of Tragedy, trans. Walter Kaufmann)
One can only rue the fact that Nietzsche did not unfold this observation into a life-negating pessimism, as did Zapffe, rather
than into a pessimism that teaches us "what it means 'to be
frightened"'-"a pessimism of strength." But by the time
Nietzsche wrote these words in his "Attempt at a Self-Criticism,"
published as a preface to the 1886 edition of The Birth of Tragedy, it was too late for his conversion, or reconversion, to a purist's pessimism. He had already hit the road toward what would
indeed frighten average mortals, a set of persons in which he did
not include himself, or did not want to include himself. Zapffe
did include himself among this set, and his analysis of those who
opted out of it fits Nietzsche to a tee: "In such cases, a person
may be obsessed with destructive joy, dislodging the whole artificial apparatus of his life and starting with rapturous horror to
make a clean sweep of it. The horror stems from the loss of all
sheltering values; the rapture from his by now ruthless identification and harmony with our nature's deepest secret-the biological unsoundness, the enduring disposition for doom." In its lifenegating aspect, pessimism lost a great champion when 
1 24 
Nietzsche became joyful about the frightful, a psychic stand that
in itself is a paradox if ever there was one.
Futurephi/ia
After Nietzsche, pess1m1sm was revaluated by some, rejuvenated by others, and still spumed as depressing by average mortals, who continued to recite their most activating illusion:
"Today is better than yesterday and tomorrow will be better
still." While being alive may be all right for the moment, the future is really the place for a person to be, at least as far as we
care to see into it. Lovecraft is a figure of exceeding intrigue
here because much of his fiction is based on a clutch of godlike
beings whose very presence in the universe degrades the idea of
betterment in human life into a cosmic miscalculation.
Azathoth the Blind Idiot God, Nyarlathotep the Crawling
Chaos, Cthulhu the Dead Dreamer: These are some of the entities that symbolize the Lovecraftian universe as a place without
sense, meaning, or value. This perspective is memorably expressed in Lovecraft's poem "Nemesis":
I have seen the dark universe yawning
Where the black planets roll without aim,
Where they roll in their horror unheeded,
Without knowledge or lustre or name.
These lines and others like them are not cordially received by votaries of the future, who will deny their vision or treat it as only a
literary diversion, which in effect is all that it is, along with every
glyph and scribble ever recorded since Gilgamesh sojourned in
the land of the dead. More popular among fans of occult fiction
are the canonical texts of Theosophy, Anthroposophy, Scientology, G. I. Gurdjieffs Fourth Way, the Kabbalah, and so on.
Among this select bibliography of arcane studies should be
added the curiosa of "transhumanism," a zealous type of utopian 

thought underwritten by the belief that day by day we are getting closer and closer to building a better human. Like believers
in libertarian free will, transhumanists believe we can make ourselves. But this is impossible. Because of evolution, we got made.
We did not bring ourselves out of the primeval ooze. And everything we have done since we became a species has been a consequence of being made. No matter what we do, it will be what
we were made to do-and nothing else. We may try to make
something of ourselves, but we cannot take over our own evolution. We made antibiotics because we were made to be the kind
of beings who make such things as antibiotics. That changed our
condition without changing us, being as we are the kind of creatures who do things and make things, yet are not in the business
of getting ourselves made. Nature had plans for us and still does.
One of those plans seems to be the dream of transhumanism,
which may just be a plan to unmake us. If so, we are not going
to alter that plan simply because we imagine we can make a
new person with new evolutionary programs that we will write.
We know how to survive and we know how to reproduce. We
know how to do many things, but we do not know what to do
with ourselves that is over and above our preset patterns. Some
of us only think we do. We are not even part of the process of
getting remade. We are following orders, as we have always
done, that nature is forever barking out.
As humans conceived transhumanism, transhumanists have
conceived posthumanism, a far-off condition in which none
will live as we have all these years but will have evolved into
something beyond our present selves. And then what? Have the
transhumanists really thought this through? And how could
they? We have no idea where our next thought is coming from,
not excluding the thoughts of transhumanists. We do have
thoughts, but we do not know what we are going to make of
them. How, then, are we to know what to make of ourselves? 
126 
Maybe we could outdo posthumanity, or at least do something
that would not take as long and would be no less useless. But it
is not as if being posthuman is an idea first conceived in the late
twentieth century. In its search for the "good," or at least the
better, it recapitulates our most ancient fantasies. Like a song
we feel we have heard even though we are hearing it for the
first time, the machinations of transhumanists call to us from
the past, and even from a pre-historical Eden of perfect existence, depending on whether or not one likes their song or cares for a homecoming in Eden. But these machinations also
sound like something that was over the moment it began-old,
stale, nothing.
By definition, transhumanists are dissatisfied with what we are
as a species. Naturally, they think that being alive is all rightso much so, in fact, that they cannot stand the idea of not being
alive and have envisioned strategies for staying alive forever.
Their problem is that they need being alive to be vastly more
all right than it is. And the power of positive thinking is not
enough to get them where they want to go. They are past all
that, or would like to be. They are also past believing in God or
an afterlife of eternal bliss. To a believer, transhumanism would
be a useless appendage to what they already believe, as well as
an offense against Him who made us as He made us, with nature
as the go-between, and long ago laid down the ways in which
we can make ourselves better and better. Those ways may be
hard to follow, but the alternative is the despair of living without hope of an unimaginably better future. For the believer's
alternative to despair, transhumanists have substituted their
own. Yet while transhumanists operate on the assumption that
we will massively profit when we self-mutate into posthumans,
the upshot of their program is still unknown. It could begin a
dynamic new chapter in the history of our race, or it could 
 127
trumpet the end of us. Either way, the prophesized leap will be
jumpstarted by all manner of gadgetry and will somehow involve artificial intelligence, nanotechnology, genetic engineering,
and other habiliments of high technology. These will be the instruments of the New Genesis, the Logos of tomorrow. Or so
says one desperate group of scientific thinkers.
For a less desperate group of scientific thinkers, posthumanism is a chimera and will not occur: We will go on with our lives
as stumblebums of the same old story. Understandably, the
transhumanist view is more arousing than old-fogy humanism
precisely because an apocalypse has been inserted as a wild card.
(See Bill Joy's "The future doesn't need us," Wired, 2000.) In this
sense, transhumanism is a secular retelling of the Christian rapture, and some of its true believers foresee it as happening within
the lifetime of many who are alive today, just as the early Christians believed in an impending Judgment Day. Perhaps at some
time in the future, such predictions will not have to take into account eschatological contingencies and we can all relax, secure in
the knowledge that day by day, in every way, we are getting
made better and better.
Transhumanism encapsulates a long-lived error among the
headliners of science: In a world without a destination, we cannot even break ground on our Tower of Babel, and no amount
of rush and hurry on our part will change that. That we are going nowhere is not a curable condition; that we must go nowhere at the fastest possible velocity just might be curable,
though probably not. And what difference would it make to
retard our progress to nowhere? Zapffe reviled technological
advancements and the discoveries to which they led, since
those interested in such things would be cheated of the distraction of finding them out for themselves at whatever pace they
chose. Every human activity is a tack for killing time, and it
seemed criminal to him that people should have their time al-
128 
ready killed for them by explorers, inventors, and innovators of
every stripe. Zapffe himself reserved his leisure hours for that
most purposive time-killer-mountain climbing.
As we should know by now, it is as easy to make fun of religious or scientific visionaries as it is to idolize them. Which
attitude is adopted depends on whether or not they tell you
what you want to hear. Given the excitements promised by the
transhumanism, odds are that it will collect a clientele of hopefuls who want to get a foot in the future, for nobody doubts
that tomorrow will be better than today. Yet one possibility
transhumanists have not wrestled with is that the ideal being
standing at the end of evolution may deduce that the best of all
possible worlds is useless, if not malignant, and that the selfextinction of our future selves would be the optimal course to
take. They have also failed to reflect upon those aspects of the
scientific world-view which may be damaging to our mental
well-being. In that case, transhumanists will not get as far as
stage one in their mission before they must head back to the
conspiracy against the human race and be reeducated in the art
of self-deceptive paradox.
Many people in this world are always looking to science to save
them from something. But just as many, or more, prefer old and
reputable belief systems and their sectarian offshoots for salvation. So they trust in the deity of the Old Testament, an incontinent dotard who soiled Himself and the universe with His
corruption, a low-budget divinity passing itself off as the genuine article. (Ask the Gnostics.) They trust in Jesus Christ, a historical cipher stitched together like Frankenstein's monster out
of parts robbed from the graves of messiahs dead and buried-a
savior on a stick. They trust in the virgin-pimping Allah and his
Drum Major Mohammed, a prophet-come-lately who pioneered a new genus of humbuggery for an emerging market of 
 129
believers that was not being adequately served by existing religious products. They trust in anything that authenticates their
importance as persons, tribes, societies, and particularly as a
species that will endure in this world and perhaps in an afterworld that may be uncertain in its reality and unclear in its layout, but which sates their craving for values not of this earth-­
that depressing, meaningless place their consciousness must
sidestep every day. 3 Sure enough, then, writers such as Zapffe,
Schopenhauer, and Lovecraft only wrote their ticket to marginality when they failed to affirm the worth and wonder of humanity, the validity of its values (whether eternal or
provisional), and, naturally, a world without a foreseeable end,
or at least a world whose end no one wants to see.
Buddhanomics
Like many faiths and philosophies that go against the Western
grain, Buddhism has baited legions of those in the cognitive
vanguard. This religion is to be praised both for its lack of an
almighty god-figure and for its gateway teaching of the Four
Noble Truths. The first of these truths is the equation between
the life of the average mortal and dukkha (roughly "suffering,"
but really whatever state of ill-being you care to name). The
second is that craving anything in this world-good physical or
mental health, long life, happiness, or even the elimination of
craving-is the provenance of all suffering. These Two Noble
Truths sit atop a religion that is incomparable for its prescriptions for salvation. These prescriptions begin with the Third
Noble Truth, that there is a way out of suffering, and continue
with the Fourth Noble Truth-that the way to be released
from the leg-irons of suffering is to follow the Noble Eightfold
Path, a list of things-to-do and things-not-to-do much like the
Old Testament Decalogue, except not as plainly spoken or
easygoing. 

By laying a heavy emphasis on human life as something that
needs to be drastically reworked due to the First Noble Truth
of dukkha, Buddhism has been disparaged as pessimistic. Naturally, Buddhists deny that their religion is any such thing. It is a
system for uncovering our true nature-and nothing else. Nevertheless, Buddhism and pessimism cannot be pried loose from
each other. The likeness between them is simply too pronounced to be overlooked. Buddhists claim that they are not
pessimists but realists. Pessimists make the same claim. Buddhists also claim they are not pessimists because their founder's
teachings showed a way out of suffering for all sentient beings.
Pessimists also have their plans toward this end. Ask Zapffe.
Ask Mainlander. Or ask Schopenhauer about working toward a
denial of the Will, which is the cause of dukkha, the facets of
which have been identified by the Ven. Dr. Thanat lnthisan,
and many other Buddhist wise men, to include "dissatisfaction,
imperfection, pain, impermanence, disharmony, discomfort, irritation, war, incompleteness, insufficiency" as well as the
physical and mental suffering of "birth, decay, disease, and
death." Calling oneself a realist is as much the privilege of the
Buddhist as it is that of the pessimist. But to designate Buddhism as anything but pessimism is just a matter of semantics.
The only real discrepancy between the two philosophies is that
hundreds of millions of Buddhists have accepted dukkha as the
primary reality of existence. How queer that pessimists cannot
boast such numbers. While it is not perceived as such by followers of this ancient religion, the disavowed fact is this: Buddhism is pessimism. Yet whereas the pessimism that dares speak
its name is met with near universal incredulity, Buddhism may
advertise as truth what no pessimist can prove--that suffering
is basic to human existence and it should be the work of our
lives to liberate ourselves from its grasp. This double standard is
flatly an outrage of logic. Of course, one must always keep in 
 131
mind the latitude religions are permitted by virtue of the fact
that their beliefs cannot be objectively corroborated and must
be taken on faith, pessimistic though they may be.
Unlike the practical uniformity of pessimists, not all Buddhists
line up on the same side even in some of the broadest aspects
of their beliefs. (Ask Stephen Batchelor, author of Buddhism
Without Beliefs, 1998.) For instance, there are differing opinions
among Buddhists regarding anatta ("no-self') and how it relates
to reincarnation, because if there is no self, then what is it that
gets reborn? To this question are loads of learned exegeses. One
belief held by many Buddhists is that human beings are bits and
pieces that add up to nothing, things of parts, hollow puppets-non-beings that think they are something they are not.
Other Buddhists believe that this is only half the story: Things
both exist and do not exist; things are not what they seem nor
are they other than they seem; things are many and they are
one; everything is nothing, including nothing.
Along with every other religion, Buddhism is a compilation
of do-it-yourself projects, and some of them, such as Pure Land
Buddhism, are only lightweight versions of the faiths scantily
detailed here. This principle has its parallel in every philosophy,
ideology, and bag of myths that has ever been presented to the
world. Because no two minds are contoured alike, no one system or collocation of systems will ever be sized to fit all. If
truth is what you seek, then the examined life will only take
you on a long ride to the limits of solitude and leave you by the
side of the road with your truth and nothing else. This gives
leave to believers in anything to have an opinion about whatever they like. For Buddhists, though, this is a problem, because
clinging to opinions, or whatever else ordinary folk cling to, is
an obstruction to becoming a right-minded practitioner of Buddhism. But you can believe that in Buddhist law, or in some-
1 32 
one's opinion of Buddhist law, there are allowance conditions
that stipulate when clinging is not really clinging. All religions
must have allowance conditions or they would implode upon
themselves by the pressure of their own doctrines.
Since Buddhism's only objective is attaining enlightenment,
that high road to nirvana (see below), it is at one with other religions in pitching a brighter future for believers in deliverance
from the woes of this world. One problem: Human beings are
rarely so sensitive to the woes of this world that they feel a
pressing need to reject all cravings for the pleasures of this
world, as Buddhism would have them do. And it seems that any
amount of pleasure is pleasure enough to get us to keep the
faith that being alive is all right for everyone, or almost everyone, and will certainly be all right for any children we cause to
be delivered into this world. How else could we stave off a craving to become extinct?
The good news for Buddhism as a for-profit religion is that
there are more than enough people who are sensitive to the
woes of this world, and who are willing to let go of their cravings for its pleasures, to seek the extinction of their everyday
selves in the oasis of nirvana (absolute beatitude, permanent detachment from all attachment to a benighted way of life, a stepoff from the cycle of death and rebirth, or whatever happy
thing you like). Reaching this oasis may happen during an individual's lifetime or could be delayed for the next round of reincarnation, when one will have another chance to cut oneself
loose from karma, a doctrine that Buddhists borrowed from the
Jains and the Hindus.
Leaving aside reincarnation and the mental gymnastics it
foists on the believer, the central focus of Buddhism's three-ring
circus remains the state or non-state of enlightenment, which,
like Jesus' ethereal theme park, is an appetizing carrot suspended in the darkness of life's suffering, if you are one of those 
 133
who are sensitive enough to life's suffering. However, to get
that carrot you must first kowtow to dogmatic authorities that
cannot be told apart from those of Christianity, spiritual ministers who strong-arm you to do some things and not do others
under pain of not becoming enlightened.
But here is the real catch: If you want to become enlightened you will never become enlightened, because in Buddhism
wanting things is just the thing that keeps you from getting the
thing you want. Less circuitously, if you want to end your suffering, you will never end your suffering. This is the "wanting
paradox," or "paradox of desire," and Buddhists are at the ready
with both rational and non-rational propositions as to why this
paradox is not a paradox. How to understand these propositions is past understanding, because, per Buddhism, there is
nothing to understand and no one to understand it. And as long
as you think there is something to understand and someone to
understand it, you are doomed. Trying for this understanding is
the most trying thing of all. Yet trying not to try for it is just as
trying. There is nothing more futile than to consciously look for
something to save you. But consciousness makes this fact seem
otherwise. Consciousness makes it seem as if (1) there is something to do; (2) there is somewhere to go; (3) there is something
to be; (4) there is someone to know. This is what makes consciousness the parent of all horrors, the thing that makes us try
to do something, go somewhere, be something, and know
someone, such as ourselves, so that we can escape our MALIGNANTLY USELESS being and think that being alive is all
right rather than that which should not be.
The Buddhist "wanting paradox" might be regarded as correlative to Zapffe's Paradox (the paradox of conscious beings attempting to disclaim their consciousness of the flagrantly joyless
possibilities of their lives) . The difference between Buddhism's 
134 
Paradox and Zapffe's Paradox is that the latter is not amenable
to being resolved, explained away, or denied, either rationally
or non-rationally. It can only be left unacknowledged so that
we can continue to live as we have all these years, or at least as
long as we can before the paradox demands acknowledgment
to the extent that we cannot live with ourselves as beings
whose existence is terribly false and paradoxical, things so uncanny that we can no longer even look at one another or hold
our heads steady. Until that day, we will keep living as obstinate selves who affirm that being conscious is an enlightened
way to be and that being alive is all right.
In the marketplace of salvation, enlightenment seems the best
buy ever offered, if only at first blush. Rather than floundering
in a world that is not worth the emptiness it is written on, you
may sign up to attain a conclusive vision of what's what and
what's not. Broadly speaking, enlightenment is the correction of
our consciousness and the establishment of a state of being in
which muddy illusion is washed away and a diamond of understanding shines through. This is the supreme desert ... if it may
be had, if it has any reality outside the pat or cryptic locutions
that advert to it.
Millions of people have spent their lives, and some have
even lost their minds, trying to win enlightenment without ever
comprehending, as they sucked their last breath, what it was
they had gambled to get. Had they attained enlightenment
without being aware of it? Are there stages of enlightenment
(maybe, depending on the type of Buddhism to which one subscribes) and how far had they gotten? In his One Taste: Daily
Reflections on Integral Spirituality, Ken Wilber, a widely known
and highly influential multidisciplinary scholar and theorist of
spiritual traditions, reported that he asked one Zen Buddhist
master "how many truly enlightened-deeply enlightened-
 135
Japanese Zen masters there were alive today." The master replied, "Not more than a dozen." Another Zen master put the
number of fully enlightened individuals in the East at one thousand throughout Zen Buddhism's history. Wilber's conclusion:
"Thus, without in any way belittling the truly stunning contributions of the glorious Eastern traditions, the point is fairly
straightforward: radical transformative spirituality is extremely
rare, anywhere in history, and anywhere in the world. (The
numbers for the West are even more depressing. I rest my
case.)" Indeed, enlightenment by Buddhism truly seems to be a
well-defended redoubt whose location cannot be triangulated
by speech, the only rule being that if you have to ask yourself if
you have arrived, then it is certain you have not.
Ego-Death
As we have seen, Buddhism's ways and means to illumination
are full of shortcomings and vexations. Nevertheless, it does
seem that some have reached a state corresponding to that of
Buddhist enlightenment as delineated in scads of scriptures, diaries, copyrighted publications, and public depositions. Curiously, these charmed individuals appear to have come to this
state unwarned, sometimes as a result of physical trauma or a
Near-Death Experience (NDE) .
Perhaps the capital instance of enlightenment by accident is
that of U. G. Krishnamurti. Although U. G. gave no credence to
any doctrine of awakening, he claimed to have experienced
"clinical death" at the age of forty-nine, after which he returned
to life as the kind of being glorified in the literature of enlightenment. Through his clinical death and its aftermath, which he
called a "calamity" due to the pain and confusion he felt during
this process, U. G. was transformed.
For decades prior to his calamity, U. G. was an earnest seeker
who sought enlightenment by effort rather than by accident. But 

his efforts got him nowhere, and he ended up financially drained.
By chance he met a woman who was willing to support him, and
for years he was something of a layabout. It was while living with
this woman that his calamity struck. Upon recovering from his
calamity, he had what he once looked for and in disgust had
given up trying to find. U. G. was no longer the person he once
was, for now he was someone whose ego had been erased. In this
state, he had all the self-awareness of a tree frog. To his good fortune, he had no problem with his new way of functioning. He
did not need to accept it, since by his report he had lost all sense
of having an ego that needed to accept or reject anything. How
could someone who had ceased to participate in the commerce
of selves, who had inadvertently forfeited his personhood, believe or not believe in anything so outlandish as enlightenment
... or any other spiritual vendibles, none of which are evident in
the least and all of which are as outmoded as the gods of antiquity or tribal deities with names that sound comical to believers
in "real" religions?4
While it may seem that U. G. had become a zombie, in a
non-philosophical sense, his post-calamity life was nothing like
that. Until his death in 2007, he spent much of his time berating
people who came to him for spiritual succor. Cantankerous and
opinionated as some of the more famous masters of Zen Buddhism, U. G. arrestingly and often humorously told those who
had made the pilgrimage to his door that everything they believed about anything was wrong. Few of them could get a word
in edgewise as he assassinated all that humanity has ever held sacred. Some would view U. G.'s disrespect for spirituality to be in
happy rapport with the nature of enlightenment, which they
have been taught cannot be pinned down by doctrines of any
kind. Others would deny this assertion, perhaps because they
have been indoctrinated to believe that both irreverence and
deference toward the transcendent are off the mark once one has 
 137
"awakened." Neither side of this squabble would have tempted
U. G. What he enunciated in interviews is the near impossibility
of human beings, except perhaps one in a billion, to think of
themselves only as animals born to survive and reproduce.
As Zapffe had written long before U. G. began slurring
every belief in the world, mental activity beyond the basic programs of our animalism has led only to suffering. ("In the beast,
suffering is self-confined; in man, it knocks holes into a fear of
the world and a despair of life.") U. G. never spoke of a solution
for what consciousness has made of our lives. We are captured
by illusions and there is no way out. That U. G. came upon a
way out, as he told his countless interrogators, was nothing but
luck, nothing he knew anything about or could pass on to others. Yet they still came to him and asked for his help. To their
pleas he immediately replied he could not help them, nor could
they help themselves. No help could be had from any sector in
which they searched. They could seek deliverance their entire
lives and make it all the way to their deathbeds with nothing
but the same useless questions and useless answers with which
they began. U. G. had his, but they would never get theirs.
So why should they go on living? Naturally, no one bluntly
posed this question to U. G. But they had his answer: There is
no "you" that lives, only a body going about its business of being
alive and obeying biology. Whenever someone asked U. G. how
they could become like him, he always replied it would be impossible for them even to desire to become like him, because
their motive for wanting to be like him was self-interested, and
as long as they believed in a self that was interested in canceling
itself, that self would want to keep itself alive and thus would
not want to know ego-death. Whatever people did with their
lives was of no concern to U. G., as he tirelessly recapitulated to
those who engaged him in conversation. He did not see his
himself as a sage with spiritual merchandise to sell. That was for 

the mountebanks of salvation who infested the world with
their codified sects, each baring its teeth to defend some trademarked trumpery.
U. G. is not the only known case of enlightenment by accident.
A quite singular instance of the experience in question is that of
the Australian physicist John Wren-Lewis, a non-religious man
who nearly died of poisoning and woke up in a hospital in a
state of enlightenment he never requested or pained himself to
earn. Both U. G. and Wren-Lewis publicly emphasized the unsought nature of their illumination. Both also warned against
gurus with recipes for enlightenment. In talks with interviewers, U. G., who did not write books, lambasted every religious
figure known to humanity as a fraud. After his own awakening,
Wren-Lewis became overtaken by the possible connection between enlightenment phenomena and ND Es. His way of thinking, for what it might be worth, parallels Zapffe's in that it
identifies ordinary consciousness as a "basic malfunction" that
"is some kind of inflation or hyperactivity of the psychological
survival-system" ("Aftereffects of Near-Death Experience: A
Survival Mechanism Hypothesis," The Journal of Transpersonal
Psychology, 1994). He derived hope that this malfunction could
be repaired from the fact that NDE-ers are sometimes relieved
from death anxiety by having their egoistic consciousness
commuted into an "impersonal consciousness" of an enlightened
sort. None of this is to say that reports of NDE experience are
any more believable than, let us say, those of alien abductions.
Leniently interpreted, however, they may foretell that our species has an outside chance at a future without extinctionfearing egos. Since the human race will never do the honorable
thing and abort itself, perhaps someday we will be individually
fixed to die without an unbecoming fight to the death.
A stereotypical report of an NDE is related by businessman 
 1 39
and author Tern Horwitz in his essay "My Death: Reflections on
My Journey into Non-Being" (Death and Philosophy, ed. Jeff
Malpas and Robert C. Solomon, 1998). In the course of describing his transformation following his death as a result of anaphylactic shock in September 1 995, Horwitz wrote: "There was no
vestige of self-importance left. It felt like death had obliterated
my ego, the attachments I had, my history, and who I had been.
Death had been very democratic. It had eliminated innumerable distinctions. With one bold stroke my past had been
erased. I had no identity in death. It didn't stay erased-some
would say that this was the real tragedy-but it was erased for
a time. Gone was my personal history with all of its little vanities. The totality of myself was changed. The 'me' was much
smaller and much more compact than it had been. All that
there was, was right in front of me. I felt incredibly light. Personality was a vanity, an elaborate delusion, a ruse." Compared
with U. G. Krishnamurti and John Wren-Lewis, Horwitz had
only a slight case of ego-death following his clinical death. Soon
afterward he was "cured" of the erasure of his identity.
Another statistic of long-term ego-death was Suzanne Segal,
who one day found she had become bereft of herself. After
years of seeking a cure to the unease this experience had set off
in her-it would seem that not everybody is at peace with being nobody-she wrote Collision with the Infinite: A Life Beyond the Personal Self (1 996) . The following year she died of a
brain tumor at the age of forty-two. Although no link was established between her diseased brain and the disappearance of
her ego, cerebral tumors causing altered states of consciousness
and changes in personality are not unknown.5
Unlike U. G. but similar to Wren-Lewis, Segal sought answers to her transformation in spiritual traditions that addressed
egoless experience. Unlike Wren-Lewis but similar to U. G., 
140 
Segal had pursued a spiritual practice, Transcendental Meditation, before she became the beneficiary of enlightenment by accident. Segal lost her ego two years after discontinuing TM1
which she performed for eight years. In an interview, she stated
that she did not feel meditation played a role in the loss of her
self-identity. U. G. was in agreement with Segal. After years of
pursuing ego-death through meditation, he railed against this
procedure as pointless and perhaps harmful.
For most of humanity, including that part which studies consciousness, the phenomenon of ego-death is not enthralling, or
even well marked as a human experience. Ordinary folk have
all their big questions answered to their satisfaction by some big
book. And cognitive psychologists, philosophers of mind, and
neuroscientists have their reputations to consider as high priests
of the noosphere. Quite naturally, then, almost no one figures
their time to be ill-spent in bickering about some point of
scripture or a psycho-philosophical poser rather than in sizing
up some superlative individuals who have called into question
what we are or what we might be aside from slaves of our egos.
Regardless of the life stories of U. G.1 Wren-Lewis, and Suzanne Segal, ego-death is a state that has nothing but anecdotal
evidence to support it, which groups this phenomenon with
mystical experiences and revealed religions. As one might imagine, though, ego-death is laden with about as much mass appeal
as physical death. It has been eyeballed as an ideal only by a miniscule number of our species who feel there is something wrong
with ego-life, which they conceive as an uncanny masquerade
where things they would rather not see are behind every false
face. To everyone else, life is life and death is death. We are not
sold on impersonal survival. It would negate all that we are1 or
think we are1 for what are we but egos itching to survive? And
once our egos have been deposed, what would be left of us? By 

all recorded accounts, everything would be left except what
Horwitz called "a vanity, an elaborate delusion, a ruse."
Some would say that if human beings must exist, the condition in which U. G., Wren-Lewis, and Segal found themselves is
the optimum model, one in which everyone's ego has been overthrown and our consciousness of ourselves as persons goes up in
smoke. As Segal tried to explain what had happened to her:
The experience of living without a personal identity, without an
experience of being somebody, an "I" or a "me," is exceedingly difficult to describe, but it is absolutely unmistakable. It can't be
confused with having a b ad day or coming down with the flu or
feeling upset or angry or spaced out. When the personal self disappears, there is no one inside who can be located as being you.
The body is only an outline, empty of everything of which it had
previously felt so full.
The mind, body, and emotions no longer referred to anyone-­
there was no one who thought, no one who felt, no one who perceived Yet the mind, body, and emotions continued to function unimpaired; apparently they did not need an "I" to keep doing what
they always did. Thinking, feeling, perceiving, speaking, all continued
as before, functioning with a smoothness that gave no indication of
the emptiness behind them. No one suspected that such a radical
change had occurred All conversations were carried on as before;
language was employed in the same manner. Questions could be
asked and answered, cars driven, meals cooked, books read, phones
answered, and letters written. (Collisian with the Infinite)
As the ego-dead, so we might imagine, we would continue to
know pain in its various forms-that is the essence of existence--but we would not be cozened by our egos to take it
personally, an attitude that converts an individual's pain into
conscious suffering. Naturally, we would still have to feed, but
we would not be omnivorous gourmands who eat for amusement, gorging down everything in nature and turning to the
laboratory for more. As for reproduction, who can say? Animals
are driven to copulate, and even as the ego-dead we would not 

be severed from biology, although we would not be unintelligently ruled by it, as we are now. As a corollary of not being
unintelligently ruled by biology, neither would we sulk over
our extinction, as we do now. Why raise another generation
destined to climb aboard the evolutionary treadmill? But then,
why not raise another generation of the ego-dead? For those
who do not perceive either their pleasures or their pains as belonging to them, neither life nor death would be objectionable
or not objectionable, desirable or not desirable, all right or not
all right. We would be the ego-dead, the self-less, and, dare we
say, the enlightened.
A depiction of what our lives might be like in such a state
would seem to have been recorded in the eightieth section of
the Tao Te Ching, perhaps to show up humankind's modus
vivendi by daydreaming about one not of this earth.
Let all lands be small
and their people few,
so they have no need
for time-saving machines.
Let them keep their minds
On the coming of death
And never stray far
From where they were born.
Should they have boats
Or carts to go traveling,
Let there be nothing
They would want to see.
Should they have weapons,
Let them be put someplace
Out of everyone's sight
To rust and grow useless. 

Let each person's duties
Be no more than may be
Kept track of by tying knots
On a short piece of string.
Let their food be enough
And their clothes drab,
Their homes decent shelter
And their lives unremarkable.
If the next land is so close
That they can hear its
Dogs barking at night and its
Roosters crowing at dawn ...
Let them get old and die
Rather than be troubled
By the least curiosity
To have a look over there.
143
One might think of this not as a description of an ego-dead society but of one that is dead all the way. But one would be
wrong. Wherever there are those who "get old and die," there
are also those who live in wait for age and for death-youths
and infants and infants-to-be. And although none of them takes
his fate personally, why should any of them take it at all? Of
course, this would not occur to the ego-dead, just as it does not
occur to species of a lower order that recycle themselves as nature bids them. The ego-dead would be back to where our race
began-surviving, reproducing, dying. Nature's way would be
restored in all its mindlessness and puppetry.
But even if ego-death is regarded as the optimum model for
human existence, one of liberation from ourselves, it still remains a compromise with being, a concession to the blunder of
creation itself. We should be able to do better, and we can. To 
144 
have our egos killed off is second-best to killing off death and
all the squalid byplay that £litters around it. So let all lands be
small, and grower smaller and smaller until no lands are left
where any human footstep need press itself upon the earth.
At the height of her ego-death, Segal was ecstatic twenty-four
hours a day. She also began to speak of what she called the "vastness," a term that sounds as if it belongs in one of Lovecraft's
tales of cosmic horror. To Segal, the vastness was a unitary phenomenon that comprised all existence. As she wrote, "The purpose of human life has been revealed. The vastness created these
human circuitries in order to have an experience of itself out of
itself that it couldn't have without them." Living in the vastness
as she did, nothing was useless to Segal because it served the
purposes of the vastness. For her, it also felt good once she had
gotten over her initial fear of being a tool of the vastness rather
than a person. However, toward the end of her life, as American
psychotherapist and Buddhist Stephan Bodian recounts in his afterword to Collision with the Infinite, Segal began to have more
intense experiences in which "the vastness became even vaster
for itself." This new phase of the vastness both distressed her
emotionally and sapped her physical energy until she died from
her unsuspected brain tumor not long afterward.
Like Segal's vastness, Schopenhauer's Will has the same
purpose in mind for human beings-to use our "circuitries" to
acquire some kind of knowledge of its mindless self. For
Schopenhauer, though, the self-seeking Will does not feel good
to human beings except during moments when we temporarily
satisfy its universal ravening as it emerges within us. Why the
vastness or the Will should want to use us in this way is a mystery. Both of these non-dualistic meta-realities do serve the
purpose of making sense of human life in their own way. But
whether they make us feel good does not seem to matter to ei-
 145
ther of them. We are just vehicles; they are the drivers. And
wherever we are going, as Segal and Schopenhauer have assured
us, along with every other individual whose consciousness has
been opened to the vastness by whatever name or nature, we
must keep in mind that we are not what we think we are. Taking things a step further, Professor Nobody would teach us that
neither is our world what we think it is, lecturing us with a
flamboyant dispassion on the omnipresence of the infernal in
"The Eyes That Never Blink."
Mist on a lake, fog in thick woods, a golden light shining on wet
stones-such sights make it all very easy. Something lives in the
lake, rustles through the woods, inhabits the stones or the earth
beneath them. Whatever it may be, this something lies j ust out of
sight, but not out of vision for the eyes that never blink. In the
right surroundings our entire being is made of eyes that dilate to
witness the haunting of the universe. But really, do the right surroundings have to be so obvious in their spectral atmosphere?
Take a cramped waiting room, for instance. Everything there
seems so well-anchored in normalcy. Others around you talk ever
so quietly; the old clock on the wall is sweeping aside the seconds
with its thin red finger; the window blinds deliver slices of light
from the outside world and shuffle them with shadows. Yet at
any time and in any place, our bunkers of banality may begin to
rumble. You see, even in a stronghold of our fellow beings we
may be subject to abnormal fears that would land us in an asylum
if we voiced them to another. Did we just feel some presence that
does not belong among us? Do our eyes see something in a corner
of that room in which we wait for we know not what?
Just a little doubt slipped into the mind, a little trickle of suspicion in the bloodstream, and all those eyes of ours, one by one,
open up to the world and see its horror. Then: no belief or body
of laws will guard you; no friend, no counselor, no appointed personage will save you; no locked door will protect you; no private
office will hide you. Not even the solar brilliance of a summer day
will harbor you from horror. For horror eats the light and digests it
into darkness. 
S ICK TO D EATH
Bleakness I
To salve the pains of consciousness, some people anesthetize
themselves with sunny thoughts. But not everyone can follow
their lead, above all not those who sneer at the sun and everything upon which it beats down. Their only respite is in the
balm of bleakness. Disdainful of the solicitations of hope, they
look for sanctuary in desolate places-a scattering of ruins in a
barren locale or a rubble of words in a book where someone
whispers in a dry voice, "I, too, am here." However, downcast
readers must be on their guard. Phony retreats have lured many
who treasure philosophical and literary works of a pessimistic,
nihilistic, or defeatist nature as indispensable to their existence.
Too often they have settled into a book that begins as an oration on bleak experience but wraps up with the author slipping
out the back door and making his way down a shining path,
leaving downcast readers more rankled than they were before
entering what turned out to be only a fa<;ade of ruins, a trompe
l'oeil of bleakness. A Confession (1882) by Leo Tolstoy is the archetype of such a book.
Having basked in his status as the author of War and Peace
(1865-69) and Anna Karenina (1875-77), not to forget his station
as a wealthy landowner, Tolstoy was ripe for a devastating reversal of some kind. This came in the form of a crisis of consciousness during which he became mightily disenchanted with human 
148 
life. Naturally, he began casting about for something to ease his
discomfiture. After turning to science for answers to the big
questions that had lately begun to eat at him, he came up with
this: "In general, the relation of the experimental sciences to life's
questions may be expressed thus: Question: 'Why do I live?' Answer: 'In infinite space, in infinite time, infinitely small particles
change their forms in infinite complexity, and when you have
understood the laws of those mutations of form you will understand why you live on the earth."'
Those inclined to query the various sciences will forever
come upon the same answer. It is a useless answer to a useless
question. But Tolstoy did not think the question useless, only
the answer, so he kept on digging until he read Schopenhauer,
who only exasperated the Russian's crisis by answering, "Life is
that which should not be-an evil; and the passage into Nothingness is the only good in life." Tolstoy was impressed with
Schopenhauer as a thinker and tried to hold the plow steady as
he made his way through the philosopher's daunting works.
At length, Tolstoy narrowed down the options that people
like himself had available to them depending on whether they
wanted to keep believing that being alive was all right or were
ready to consider the alternative. (Please pardon the length of
this quotation, but Tolstoy's four principal strategies by which
his high-class circle managed the predicament of conscious existence deserve as much of a hearing as Zapffe's four principal
strategies by which everyone manages the same predicament.)
I found that for people of my circle there were four ways out of
the terrible position in which we are all placed.
The first was that of ignorance. It consists in not knowing, not
understanding, that life is an evil and an absurdity. People of this
sort ... have not yet understood that question of life .... They see
neither the dragon that awaits them nor the mice gnawing the
shrub by which they are hanging, and they lick the drops of
honey. But they lick those drops of honey only for a while: Some-
 149
thing will turn their attention to the dragon and the mice, and
there will be an end to their licking. From them I had nothing to
learn--one cannot cease to know what one does know.
The second way out is Epicureanism. It consists, while knowing
the hopelessness of life, in making use meanwhile of the advantages
one has, disregarding the dragon and the mice, and licking the honey
in the best way, especially if there is much of it within reach. Solomon expresses this way out thus: "Then I commended mirth, because a man hath no better thing under the sun, than to eat, and to
drink, and to be merry: and that this should accompany him in his
labor the days of his life, which God giveth him under the sun.
Therefore eat thy bread with joy and drink thy wine with a merry
heart .... Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days
of the life of thy vanity ... for this is thy portion in life and in thy
labors which thou takest under the sun .... Whatsoever thy hand
findeth to do, do it with thy might, for there is not work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest."
That is the way in which the majority of people of our circle
make life possible for themselves. Their circumstances furnish them
with more of welfare than of hardship, and their moral dullness
makes it possible for them to forget that the advantage of their position is accidental, and that not everyone can have a thousand
wives and palaces like Solomon, that for everyone who has a thousand wives there are a thousand without a wife, and that for each
palace there are a thousand people who have to build it in the
sweat of their brows; and that the accident that has today made me
a Solomon may tomorrow make me a Solomon's slave. The dullness
of these people's imagination enables them to forget the things that
gave Buddha no peace--the inevitability of sickness, old age, and
death, which today or tomorrow will destroy all these pleasures.
So think and feel the majority of people of our day and our
manner of life. The fact that some of these people declare the
dullness of their thoughts and imaginations to be a philosophy,
which they call Positive, does not remove them, in my opinion,
from the ranks of those who, to avoid seeing the question, lick the
honey. I could not imitate these people; not having their dullness
of imagination I could not artificially produce it in myself. I could
not tear my eyes from the mice and the dragon, as no vital man
can after he has once seen them. 

The third escape is that of strength and energy. It consists in
destroying life, when one has understood that it is an evil and an
absurdity. A few exceptionally strong and consistent people act
so. Having understood the stupidity of the j oke that has been
played on them, and having understood that it is better to be dead
than to be alive, and that it is best of all not to exist, they act accordingly and promptly end this stupid joke, since there are
means: a rope round one's neck, water, a knife to stick into one's
heart, or the trains on the railways; and the number of those of
our circle who act in this way becomes greater and greater, and
for the most part they act so at the best time of their life, when
the strength of their mind is in full bloom and few habits degrading to the mind have as yet been acquired.
I saw that this was the worthiest way of escape and I wished
to adopt it.
The fourth way out is that of weakness. It consists in seeing
the truth of the situation and yet clinging to life, knowing in advance that nothing can come of it. People of this kind know that
death is better than life, but not having the strength to act rationally-to end the deception quickly and kill themselves-they
seem to wait for something. This is the escape of weakness, for if I
know what is best and it is within my power, why not yield to
what is best? ... I found myself in that category.
So people of my class evade the terrible contradiction in four
ways. Strain my attention as I would, I saw no way except those
four ... .' (Trans. Aylmer Maude)
Earlier in his life, Tolstoy had fought intrepidly in the Crimean
War, and in War and Peace he used this experience for his rendition of Russian life during the reign of Napoleon. Courageous in
battle, the literary master also flourished his fortitude in writing
the words in the above quotation. Few men of such wealth and
accomplishment have had the mettle to express sentiments of
this nature within earshot of their peers and the general public.
Naturally, Tolstoy expressed these sentiments only after he had
moved to safer ground, which turned his "confession" into a
handbook for survival, a trip guide with directions for skating 

around the pitfalls of consciousness that Zapffe would later outline in "The Last Messiah."
Tolstoy's salvation came about when he hit upon a way to
disown coherence and sidle up to religion, even though it was
not religion of the common sort and led to his excommunication
from the Russian Orthodox Church. A titan of conceptual prestidigitation, he had rationalized his way into irrationality. Spending time with his serfs helped him to befuddle his consciousness.
Like them-more nicely, like his perception of them-he began
living not by his brain but by his "gut." Then he started reasoning
with his gut, which showed him the way to recovery and spared
him the ordeal of becoming a suicide. Later, though, his mind
went to work again, and he was once more in crisis. He remained
preoccupied with life and death and meaning for the rest of his
days and as an author preached a brand of positive thought-as
in the bathetic "Death of lvan Ilyich" (1886)-in an ongoing crusade against the bleakness that dogged him.
Bleakness II
Having been betrayed by such works as Tolstoy's Confession,
connoisseurs of bleakness may become shrewd readers. If they
are mistrustful of a book, leery that the promise of its inaugural
pages will be broken by its conclusion, they turn first to the
ending. Many books promoted as vehicles of a "dark vision" finish up by lounging in a warm bath of affirmation, often doing a
traitorous. turnabout in their closing pages or paragraphs.2 As
every author, publisher, and carnival owner knows, lurid billing
gets a patron in the door. And so we have innumerable books
and magazine articles with such inquiring titles as The Misadventure of Consciousness: Are Human Beings a Mistake of Evolution? or "Should We Stop Having Children?" The answer is
always "No," sometimes resounding in its declamation but more
often qualified, which is even more vile. Searchers after bleak-

ness would do well, then, to begin at the ending of books and
magazine articles with doomful titles or angst-fraught openings
if they are not to be chiseled by a bait-and-switch maneuver.
One of the finest curtain closers in fiction is that of Horace
McCoy's short novel They Shoot Horses, Don't They? The protagonist of this story is a young woman named Gloria Beatty.
Hoping to walk away with a sum of much-needed cash, and for
lack of anything better to do, Gloria becomes an entrant in a
grueling dance marathon during the Great Depression of the
1930s. A disconsolate loser from the start of the book, she begins the dance with an insight not habitually stressed in popular
fiction. "It's peculiar to me," Gloria says to her partner in the
marathon, "that everybody pays so much attention to living and
so little to dying. Why are these high-powered scientists always
screwing around trying to prolong life instead of finding pleasant ways to end it? There must be a hell of a lot of people in
the world like me--who want to die but haven't got the guts."
After the dance marathon has taken its toll on Gloria and
the other contestants, her once happy-go-lucky partner goes
over to her side, and with more nobility than any high-powered
scientist and more mercy than any god born of human imagination, he helps her to end it all. This liberation is effectuated in
one of the most common and untidy ways the suicidal have
been forced to use for so long-a bullet to the brain. The ending
of McCoy's novel is what the average mortal would call bleak.
Naturally, bleak-minded readers of They Shoot Horses swoon
with relief when the gunshot has done its work. Yet even the
consolations of bleakness have their limits for those who treasure philosophical and literary works of a pessimistic, nihilistic,
or defeatist nature as indispensable to their existence. And
should bleakness itself fail them, they have been failed indeed. 
 153
Pro-Life
They Shoot Horses, Don't They? was first published in 1 935.
Since that time, scientists have continued screwing around to
draw out our days of pain and have done almost nothing on the
other front. It is as if they have taken Victor Frankenstein as a
role model and emulate him as they can. In his 1 994 bestseller
How We Die: Reflections on Life 's Final Chapter, surgeon Sherwin B. Nuland recounts how he coaxed a ninety-two-year-old
woman into having an operation that would wring from her a
few more months or years of life. While she initially declined,
content to die at what was already an advanced age, Dr. Nuland
wore her down and got her into the operating room, figuring, as
he states, that his patient was "one of those people to whom
survival was not worth the cost." He admits that he withheld
from her the exact nature of that cost as it would be extracted
in the form of postoperative agonies should she survive the surgery. She did survive long enough to suffer those agonies and to
let Nuland know what a villain she considered him to be.
Subsequent to some perfunctory hand-wrenching about his
dishonorable ministration, the doctor tries to vindicate himself by
confiding that, had he not performed this operation, he would be
chastised by his peer group at the hospital's weekly surgical conference for not following standard operating procedure. Nuland's
fellow surgeons, so he informs us, would have viewed his compliance with a patient's request to let her body die without further
tampering as an ethical call. But that was not his call to make. He
was not a moral philosopher. He was a technician entrusted to
keep bodies beating with life. All his decisions, then, must comply with this trust or he would have to answer for why they did
not. And to answer that his patient chose not to go under the
knife would be unacceptable, since doctors should be the only
ones to decide such things.3 
154 
In their actions, Nuland and his colleagues played out a mainstay of the horror genre: that of an experiment gone wrong.
This convention became proverbial following the publication in
i818 of a novel that immortalized Mary Shelley. It is as if Nuland and his fellow mad doctors took the botched surgery in
that book as their guiding light. "What protocol would Frankenstein follow?" they might have asked themselves. He was
their mentor-the one for whom Life was the greatest show on
earth. To boot, Nuland had already sized up the old woman as
"one of those people."
Not as philosophically ahead of her years as McCoy's Gloria
in They Shoot Horses, Don't They?, Nuland's patient did know
when the time had come for her to bow out gracefully. She
thought she might be allotted that much control over her life.
What she did not know was that she was strapped down in
Frankenstein's world, and by damn she would live and die by
Frankenstein's Oath: "We, as licensed protectors of the species
and members in good standing of the master-class of the race,
by the power invested in us by those who wish to survive and
reproduce, vow to enforce the fiction that life is worth having
and worth living come hell or irreparable brain damage." How
could an old woman who had been stigmatized as "one of those
people" go up against such a juggernaut of chicanery?
Eventually euthanasia will be an elective procedure for the terminally ill, and perhaps for anyone who so chooses this sure cure.
At this stage of social progress, however, those who reject Frankenstein and affirm McCoy's Gloria must take care of themselves
... if they can work up the guts or get a little help. But standing
in the way of their making the right move are some formidable
obstacles. One of them is the conscience (archaic for "consciousness") that Shakespeare's Hamlet avowed "makes cowards of us
all." Another is the peer pressure that Dr. Nuland felt might 
 155
squeeze him out of a job. There may also be a crew of friends and
relatives whose lives are interwoven with those of suicides and
who die with them though they live on after the "crime" of voluntary death has been committed.
If nature made a blunder by retching up creatures in which
consciousness grew like a fungus, she still knew enough to implant in them an instinct that serves the species and spurs on its
members to chew off a leg to escape capture and killing, whose
dominant drives are survival and the spreading of themselves
far and wide. Should any philosopher ever establish that life is
not worth having and not worth living, the average mortal, as
well as the average surgeon, would somehow preserve the fiction of its value, however meager that might be.
Thanatophobia
A philosophical bromide of the post-nihilistic era asserts that
being alive has no value except within a limited framework. In
the history of cinema, a well-worn storyline is that of a lawenforcement official who moves from a big city to a small town
because in the big city his efforts to better his environment were
ineffective or unnoticeable while those in a small town, he expects, will "make a difference." The plan here is to change
frameworks in hopes of creating the illusion that one's life has
value in itself. It is an atheistic plan, if not overtly so. Theists do
not need limited frameworks to snatch some meaning for their
lives because they believe they have an absolute framework in a
Higher Power, even though they really do not. The veritable exclusion of a deity from both high and low cultural products testifies that theism is a rather weak framework of meaning for the
majority of mortals, or at least for those who consume high and
low cultural products. If this were not so, then movies and other
types of entertainment in which meaning is found within the
frameworks of romantic love, action in the world, and so on 

would be unnecessary, as they prove to be among certain Amish
and Mennonite sects.
Outside of the movies, the plan of exchanging one framework for another is more difficult to pull off. And since these
frameworks are made up by our minds, and not by a filmmaker,
they may break up at any moment. Although one may believe
in an ultimate frame in which our lives are lived out, the persistence of this belief is uncertain and not reliably consolatory.
Faith in some absolute--or, alternatively, faith in some nontheistic framework of meaning-may go limp without advance
notice. Once the frame falls in upon itself, we must fall back on
our own resources and seek out another frame. None of these
frames is constant in preserving our comfort of mind and assisting us in making sense out of our lives. Moving from frame to
frame may afford us some comfort and sense for a good while,
yet there still remains that final frame from which we will never
break loose because it is a holding place waiting to be filled by
pain and then, in some form, by death. This is not a frame one
wants to explore for very long. All things considered, the happiest epitaph to have etched on one's headstone is this: "He never
knew what hit him." On second thought, though, would dying
without so much as a heads- up and in the blink of an eye really
be the best way for us to go?
In his "Letter on Happiness" addressed to Menoeceus, Epicurus
wrote: "Foolish ... is the man who says that he fears death, not
because it will pain when it comes, but because it pains in the
prospect." This statement seems to affirm that there is nothing
foolish about fearing the pain of death "when it comes." But
when Epicurus himself was dying, he wrote a note to his friend
Idomeneus, "On this blissful day, which is also the last of my
life, I write this to you. My continual sufferings from strangury
[due to kidney stones] and dysentery are so great that nothing 
 157
could increase them; but I set above them all the gladness of
mind at the memory of our past conversations." So Epicurus
had all a mortal could want: to be fearless of dying, to be happy
while dying, and to be unafraid of death.
Unflustered as he was by the process of dying, the founder
of Epicureanism offered no logic for why others should not be
terrorized by it. His only logical formula was for the relieving
oneself of the fear of death: "Whatever causes no annoyance
when it is present, causes only a groundless pain in the expectation. Death, therefore, the most awful of evils, is nothing to us,
seeing that, when we are, death is not come, and, when death is
come, we are not." Some persons may believe in Epicurus's
logic and by it not suffer the "groundless pain in the expectation" of death. But how many can say the same about death's
pain before it comes or "when it comes"? This question brings
us back to our second thoughts on what would be the happiest
epitaph to have etched on one's headstone.
Suppose that the pain of dying were taken out of our lives?
Suppose that we all died without so much as a heads-up and in
the blink of an eye, because if our deaths did not happen in this
manner then dying would necessarily be painful. How else
would you know you were dying without the presence of pain,
the fear of which even Epicurus did not think was foolish? One
second we are alive, and the next we are dead. Then all of us
could never know what hit us, a gift that is now reserved only
for a happy few. Ideally democratic, this system of mortality
would equalize our ruination as one by one, or thousands in a
stroke, we departed from this life without so much as a headsup and in the blink of an eye. Every time we sat down in a chair,
we could not be sure we would rise again before the reaper impalpably took our hand. We could bypass every pain that would
lead to our death, which is not to say we would bypass pains
that would not lead to our death. Being in pain would then 

mean that one was not dying. Everything would be as it is now
except that we would succumb without so much as a heads-up
and in the blink of an eye. We would never have to think about
How we would die, only When. And when the When came, we
would not even know we had died. Each breath could be our
last. Under such an arrangement, we would either have to become Epicureans and not fear death or, more likely, we would
divert from our consciousness the thought that we could die
without so much as a heads-up and in the blink of an eye. The
latter is more likely because this is our present approach to the
inevitability of our death, only we would never have to fear the
all but inevitable pain of dying. Some morbid citizens among us
might become cataleptic with anxiety because their next breath
may be their last, but most of us would not be wrecked by such
unremitting worry. As a further bonus, we would have no grisly
images about the How, since the How would be the same for
all. So even on second thought, the happiest epitaph to have
etched on one's headstone would be: "He never knew what hit
him." We would still have to live our lives in shaky frameworks,
but death would be nothing to us because dying would be nothing to us, or most of us, since some of us might be cataleptic
with the morbid fear that our next breath may be our last. But
at least most of us would have it all, as did Epicurus, and would
not be the least bit pained about dying, as the Greek philosopher was not. Who among us would be so unrepentantly wayward as to want a painful heads-up that we are dying or to die
in anything more than the blink of an eye? And only our most
morbid citizens would feel anxious about death.
Be that as it may, there is a school of psychology that has us all
figured as morbid citizens. Known as Terror Management Theory (TMT), its principles were inspired by the writings of the
Canadian cultural anthropologist Ernest Becker, who was one 
 159
with Zapffe in wondering why a "damning surplus of consciousness" had not caused humanity to go "extinct during great
epidemics of madness." In his best-known work, The Denial of
Death (1973)1 Becker wrote: "I believe that those who speculate
that a full apprehension of man's condition would drive him insane are right, quite literally right." Zapffe concluded that we
kept our heads by "artificially limiting the content of consciousness." Becker stated his identical conclusion as follows:
"[Man] literally drives himself into a blind obliviousness with
social games, psychological tricks, personal preoccupations so
far removed from the reality of his situation that they are forms
of madness, but madness all the same." Outlawed truisms. Taboo commonplaces.
Synthesizing and expanding Becker's core ideas, three psychology professors-Sheldon Solomon, Jeff Greenberg, and
Tom Pyszczynski-presented the concepts of TMT to the psychological community in the mid-198os. In its clinical studies
and research, TMT indicates that the mainspring of human behavior is thanatophobia, and that this fear determines the entire
landscape of our lives. To subdue our death anxiety, we have
trumped up a world to deceive ourselves into believing that we
will persist-if only symbolically-beyond the breakdown of
our bodies. We know this fabricated world because we see it
around us every day, and to perpetuate our sanity we apotheosize it as the best world in the world. Housing the most cyclopean fabrications are houses of worship where some people go
to get a whiff of meaning, which to such people means only
one thing-immortality. In heaven or hell or reincarnated life
forms, we must go on and on-us without end. Travesties of
immortalism are effected day and night in obstetrics wards, factories of our future that turn out a product made in its makers'
image, a miracle granted by entering into a devil's bargain with
God, who is glorified with all the credit for giving us a chance 
160 
to have our names and genetics projected into a time we will
not live to see.4
However, as TMT analyzes this scheme, getting the better
of our death anxiety is not as simple as it might appear. If we
are to be at peace with our mortality, we need to know that
what we leave behind us when we die will survive just as we
left it. Those churches cannot be just any churches-they must
be our churches, whoever we may be. The same holds true of
progeny and its stand-ins. In lieu of personal immortality, we
are willing to accept the survival of persons and institutions
that we regard as extensions of us-our families, our heroes, our
religions, our countries.5 And anyone who presents a threat to
our continuance as a branded society of selves, anyone who
does not look and live as we do, should think twice before
treading on our turf, because from here to eternity it is every
self for itself and all its facsimiles. In such a world, one might
extrapolate that the only honest persons-from the angle of
self-delusion, naturally-are those who brazenly implement
genocide against outsiders who impinge upon them and their
world. With that riff-raff out of the way, there will be more
room on earth and in eternity for the right sort of people and
their fabrications.
That said, promulgators of TMT believe that a universal dispersion of their ideas will make people more tolerant of the alien
worldviews of others and not kill them because those worldviews remind them of how ephemeral or unfounded their own
may be. The paradox of this belief is that it requires everyone to
abandon the very techniques of terror management by which
TMT claims we so far have managed our terror, or some of it. As
usual, though, there is an upbeat way out for terror management
theorists in that they argue "that the best worldviews are ones
that value tolerance of different others, that are flexible and open
to modifications, and that offer paths to self-esteem minimally 
 16i
likely to encourage hurting others" (Handbook of Experimental
Existential Psychology, ed. Jeff Greenberg et al.). Of course, this is
just another worldview that brandishes itself as the best worldview in the world, meaning that it would agitate others with a
sense of how ephemeral or unfounded their own may be and
cause them to retaliate. But terror management theorists also
have a back-up plan, which is that in the future we will not need
terror management and instead will discover that "serious confrontations with mortality can have positive, liberating effects,
facilitating real growth and life satisfaction." There is no arguing
that humanity may someday reap the benefits of a serious confrontation with mortality. While waiting for that day, we still
have genocide as the ultimate insurance of our worldviews.
In categorical opposition to genocide on an as-needed basis
are such individuals as Gloria Beatty. Without making too much
of a mess, they quietly shut the door on a single life, caring not
that they leave behind people who are not like them. Most of
these antisocial types are only following the logic of pain to its
conclusion. Some plan their last bow to serve the double duty of
both delivering them from life and avenging themselves for some
wrong, real or imagined, against them. Also worthy of mention is
a clique among the suicidal for whom the meaning of their act is
a darker thing. Frustrated as perpetrators of an all-inclusive extermination, they would kill themselves only because killing it all
is closed off to them. They hate having been delivered into a
world only to be told, by and by, 'This way to the abattoir, Ladies and Gentlemen." They despise the conspiracy of Lies for Life
almost as much as they despise themselves for being a party to it.
If they could unmake the world by pushing a button, they would
do so without a second thought. There is no satisfaction in a
lonesome suicide. The phenomenon of "suicide euphoria" aside,
there is only fear, bitterness, or depression beforehand, then the
troublesomeness of the method, and nothingness afterward. But 

to push that button, to depopulate this earth and arrest its rotation as well-what satisfaction, as of a job prettily done. This
would be for the good of all, for even those who know nothing
about the conspiracy against the human race are among its injured parties.6
Tragedy
As we are all well aware, people often have seriously discrepant
interests and desires. If this were not so, we would all be getting
along with one another, which has never been and never will be
the rule. Nothing in our history or our nature even hints that
we will ever liquidate our differences, which can be anything
from a good-natured divergence of opinion to a war-making
contentiousness over property rights. Some people would like
to have a little peace rather than the ever-sounding disharmony
of bloodletting. But for that to happen, our myriad voices
would have to dissolve into a single pitch-a unison that would
bore to tears anyone who is not a saint or ego-dead.
Our common preference as a species is for difference rather
than unity. (Vive la difference. Vive la guerre.) Nobody designed
us to be this way-it just happens to be how we blundered
into the nightmare of being. Life preys on life, per Schopenhauer and natural history. One organism's body is another organism's meal. As the title character of Stephen Sondheim's
Sweeney Todd (1979) sings to his partner in manslaughter, one
Mrs. Lovett: "For what's the sound of the world out there? It's
man devouring man, my dear." To claim otherwise is a lie. Differences make all the difference to us. What we want is variety
in our lives-a multitude of distractions to keep consciousness
in its cage. What we want is the unheard-of, the nothing-like.
And there is nothing like the screech of Sweeney's blade that
we hear at the opening to Sondheim's musical tragedy about
the Demon Barber of Fleet Street. 

To entertain ourselves for a spell, let us proclaim that were it
not for tragedy the human race would have gone extinct long ago.
It keeps us on our toes and pushes us toward the future in a
paradoxical search to purge the tragic from our lives. As the wise
puppet said, "Better we should be inundated by tragedy than to
have nothing meaningful to work toward." No one knows this
better than the entertainers among us, those sublimating masters
of artifice who could not forge their "great works" without the
screams and sobs arising out of the pit where tremulous shadows
run from themselves.
As decreed by its author, each action and consequence in
Sweeney Todd flows out of and feeds into the tragic, artificially
speaking. It is the pedal tone over which all other propellants of
the drama-for instance, beauty and love--serve as passing grace
notes that seem to suggest something other than the tragic, yet
are actually as much a part of the piece as the unhomely horrors
that stalk the stage. While Sondheim's musical inspires the pity
and fear that Aristotle believed should be affects of tragic drama,
no Aristotelian purgation of emotion or catharsis is infused in us
at the end. From the opening to the finale of Sondheim's tragedy
there is only a perpetual agon among casualties of the human
condition.
So Sweeney begins his tragic tale: "There was a barber and
his wife." In the style of many a horror that has wormed its way
from the muck of organic existence, Sweeney Todd has as its
back-story a happy marriage and the propagation of a new life,
in this case that of the child Johanna. ("Wake up, Johanna, it's
another bright red day," sings Pater Todd.) And new life only
rehashes old life in its pain when one offspring meets another. "I
feel you, Johanna I I'll steal you, Johanna," croons Anthony to
his beloved, who together compose a romantic pairing for the
purpose of casting a ray of false hope into the sooty stage set of
the drama. 

However, to anyone who has not fallen asleep during the
performance, this new Adam and Eve are only being readied for
the meat grinder of existence, just as were a barber named Benjamin Barker and his wife Lucy, all because Judge Turpin lusted
after Benjamin's spouse and got him out of the way by unjustly
sentencing the haircutter to a long prison term in Australia. Deranged by her rape at a soiree presided over by the judge, Lucy
kills herself, or tries to, by drinking poison, leaving her infant
daughter in the hands of the dirty old jurist, who raises her as
his ward and, despite his best efforts, drools to have her in his
bed following a May-December marriage. When Benjamin returns after his escape from prison some decades later, all he
wants is to be reunited with his wife and child. Alas, this is not
to be, which is how Sweeney Todd, mad to avenge the wrongs
against him and his wife, not to mention the abduction of his
child, comes to be born. In league with Mrs. Lovett, an unscrupulous maker of meat pies, the tragedy begins in earnest as
Sweeney begins slicing throats and his consort grinds his victims
into tasty edibles to be sold at her shop.
As husband and wife raising a girl-child, Benjamin and Lucy
would have been galloping bores. It is only when they have
been driven in chains through the inferno of their lives that
they are fit to slake our thirst for tragedy, motivator of both the
masses and above-average mortals. They are positioned within
the innermost circle of hell, while Mrs. Lovett, Judge Turpin,
Tobias Ragg, and others radiate concentrically about them with
their own fateful cravings (for beauty, love, and such like), edging them ever closer to the barber's blade and the fire-belching
oven.
Ready or not, we all end up as filling for one of Mrs.
Lovett' s meat pies. In the reported last words of Thomas Lovell
Beddoes, the Romantic poet called himself "food for what I am
good for-worms." Even though worms do not dine on many of 
 165
us in modernized nations, the point still resonates that our lives
are fundamentally inglorious. It is as a counterweight to the
blithering fatuousness of human life that tragedy as entertainment performs a crucial function-that of coating the spattered
nothingness of our lives with a veneer of grandeur and style,
qualities of the theatrical world and not the everyday one. This
is why we are thrilled with the horror of Sweeney Todd and
envy the qualities that he possesses and we lack. He is as edifying as any sage when he sings "We all deserve to die," given that
none of us can unmake our making. He has a sense of mission
that few who are made of flesh and blood rather than of music
and poetry will ever know ("But the work waits I I'm alive at
last I And I'm full of joy"). Most of all, he has the courage and
bravado to do that which he knows needs to be done. "To seek
revenge may lead to hell," he cautions, to which Mrs. Lovett answers, "But everyone does it and seldom as well . . . as
Sweeney."
Nature is limited to Grand Guignol, spectacles of bloodlust
and fests of slaughter. But we humans can reach for things more
heady than the corpse. After murder and cannibalism have been
played out in Sweeney Todd, the dead rise up for an encore, one
of many they will make in a world where nature is not in
charge--a world that spins in the supernatural, our world. Collectively, we are the undead, and for us the work will always be
waiting, the devouring will never be done until someone or
something performs the service of killing our rat race or we kill
off ourselves. As in the beginning, so at the end, the dangling
puppets sing: "Attend the tale of Sweeney Todd," a story that
makes for a wonderfully tragic evening at the theater.
Whatever else we may be as creatures that go to and fro on the
earth and walk up and down upon it, we are meat. A cannibalistic tribe that once flourished had a word to describe what they 
1 66 
ate. That word translates as "the food that talks." Most of the food
that we have eaten over the course of human history has not
talked. But it does make other noises, terrible sounds as it makes
the transition from living meat to dead meat on the slaughterhouse floor. If we could hear these sounds every time we sat
down to a hearty meal, would we still be the wanton gobblers of
flesh that most of us are now? This is hard to say. But as Farmer
Vincent (Rory Calhoun) says in the movie Motel Hell (1980):
"Meat's meat and a man's gotta eat." And it takes all kinds of critters to make Farmer Vincent's fritters.
Beef, pork, sometimes goat-they go into us and come out
of us. This is part of the regimen of nonsense that nature forced
upon us. But it is not all the nonsense we must endure as we go
to and fro on the earth and walk up and down upon it. The nature nonsense, the God nonsense. How much nonsense can we
take in our lives? And is there any way we can escape it? No,
there is not. We are doomed to all kinds of nonsense: the pain
nonsense, the nightmare nonsense, the sweat and slave nonsense, and many other shapes and sizes of insufferable nonsense.
It is brought to us on a plate, and we must eat it up or face the
death nonsense.7
But perhaps by lustfully consuming the worst nonsense of
our lives, including the death nonsense, we may eat our way out
of our all-consuming tragedy as a conscious species. Professor
Nobody has something to say about this tactic in his lecture
"Sardonic Harmony." Here he builds to a tone of undisguised acrimony unusual for the coolly didactic, self-styled savant. But
that is no reason we should not listen to his nonsense once more.
Compassion for human hurt, a humble sense of our impermanence, an absolute valuation of justice-all our so-called virtues
only trouble us and serve to bolster, not assuage, horror. In addition, these qualities are our least vital, the least in line with life.
More often than not, they stand in the way of one's rise in the
welter of this world, which found its pace long ago and has not 

deviated from it since. The putative affirmations of life--each of
them based on the propaganda of Tomorrow: reproduction, revolution in its widest sense, piety in any form you can name--are
only affirmations of our desires. And, in fact, these affirmations affirm nothing but our propensity for self-torment, our mania to
preserve a demented innocence in the face of gruesome facts.
By means of supernatural horror we may evade, if momentarily,
the horrific reprisals of affirmation. Every one of us, having been
stolen from nonexistence, opens his eyes on the world and looks
down the road at a few convulsions and a final obliteration. What a
weird scenario. So why affirm anything, why make a pathetic virtue of a terrible necessity? We are destined to a fool's fate that deserves to be mocked. And since there is no one else around to do
the mocking, we will take on the job. So let us indulge in cruel
pleasures against ourselves and our pretensions, let us delight in the
Cosmic Macabre. At least we may send up a few bitter laughs into
the cobwebbed corners of this crusty old universe.
Supernatural horror, in all its eerie constructions, enables a
reader to taste treats inconsistent with his personal welfare. Admittedly, this is not a practice likely to find universal favor. True macabrists are as rare as poets and form a secret society by the badstanding of their memberships elsewhere, some of their outside affiliations having been cancelled as early as birth. But those who have
gotten a good whiff of other worlds and sampled a cuisine marginal
to stable existence will not be able to stay themselves from the uncanny feast of horrors that has been laid out for them. They will loiter in moonlight, eyeing the entranceways to cemeteries, waiting for
some propitious moment to crash the gates and see what is inside.
Once and for all, let us speak the paradox aloud: "We have
been force-fed for so long the shudders of a thousand graveyards
that at last, seeking a macabre redemption, a salvation by horror,
we willingly consume the terrors of the tomb ... and find them to
our liking." 
TH E C ULT OF
GRINNING MARTYRS
Institutionalized
Undeniably, one of the great disadvantages of consciousnessthat is, consciousness considered as the parent of all horrors-is
that it exacerbates necessary sufferings and creates unnecessary
ones, such as the fear of death. Not having what it takes to take
their own lives (ask Gloria Beatty), those who suffer intolerably
learn to hide their afflictions, both necessary and unnecessary,
because the world does not run on pain time but on happy
time, whether or not that happiness is honestly felt or a mask
for the blackest despondency. Every shrewd slave knows enough
to be as perky as he is submissive in the presence of his master.
And those seated in the head offices of the earth know that
gales of happy talk must be blown the way of ordinary folk,
who need to hear that things are all right all the time, or, if they
are not all right, soon will be. Whether your ambition is to rule
over your fellows or simply to maneuver among them, a show
of jaunty bptimism is requisite.
In a section of The World as Will and Representation where
Schopenhauer argues that only pain is real while pleasure is an
illusion, the philosopher writes: "I cannot here withhold the
statement that optimism, where it is not merely the thoughtless
talk of those who harbor nothing but words under their shallow
foreheads, seems to me to be not merely an absurd, but also a
really wicked, way of thinking, a bitter mockery of the most un169 
170 
speakable sufferings of mankind" (Schopenhauer's emphasis).
Those who do not wholly endorse Schopenhauer's opinion of
optimism can still gain some understanding of what he is talking about when they behold a spittle-chinned demagogue bawling out homilies and lies to a rapt audience. It is on such
occasions that optimism reveals itself as so noisome that even
those who customarily prefer an optimistic spell to be cast
upon them may become queasy with a sense of the wickedness
that turns the gears of the world-machine. "Wickedness," we
know, is a moral term, for those who care about such fabrications. Yet sometimes those who do not usually care a whit
about such things are moved to bark out moral recriminations
as the horribly clownish face of optimism brightens the sky the
better to peruse the bodies and minds being mangled below.
Optimistically wicked or not, most people cannot afford to
care, or to care too much, if they are living in the best or the
worst of all possible worlds. They can only care about the one
thing that, if one is to think of being alive as being all right, is
worth caring about-feeling good, or as good as possible, whatever "feeling good" might mean to a certain individual at a certain time. Should anyone ask what you are doing, you might
say, "I'm hammering a nail" or "I'm searching for absolute truth."
Yet all you are really saying is this: "I'm trying to feel as good as
I can." Of course, you may be caught in a tight spot where the
best you can feel is not very good or is even very bad. These are
situations in which the alternative, or the perceived alternative,
is to feel worse. Ergo, you are still trying to feel as good as you
can, although you might not see it that way as you mark time
feeling not so good until you can once again feel good in the
way you like most. But as evolution would have it, we seem to
have a "negativity bias" that reins in those feelings which, when
we feel them, are felt to be unquestionably good.
As one arm of evolutionary psychology hypothesizes, pleas-
171
urable emotions and sensations germinated because they were
adaptive.' Example: In past ages, climactic release from the
stress of carnal desire was solely a catalyst for the generative
survival of our species, the link between the two phenomena
not yet being known. Following the advent of language, everyone began praising fleshly pleasure, while few, if any, celebrate
the biological drive that leads to it, just as everyone praises a
good meal but not the hunger that makes it so pleasurable. The
analogy between these pleasures and others that are also appetite-driven, such as those of a drug addict, should be clear. Being
freed of a desire is indeed a pleasure. But knowing the remorseless ways of nature, should anyone be thunderstruck that by
mutation she has put a lid on the extent of our pleasure and a
limit on how long it may last, not to mention favoring pain as
the main inducement for our behavior?2
If human pleasure did not have both a lid and a time limit,
we would not bestir ourselves to do things that were not pleasurable, such as toiling for our subsistence. And then we would
not survive. By the same token, should our mass mind ever become discontented with the restricted pleasures doled out by
nature, as well as disgruntled over the lack of restrictions on
pain, we would omit the mandates of survival from our lives
out of a stratospherically acerbic indignation. And then we
would not reproduce. As a species, we do not shout into the
sky, "The pleasures of this world are not enough for us." In fact,
they are just enough to drive us on like oxen pulling a cart full
of our calves, which in their tum will put on the yoke. As inordinately evolved beings, though, we can postulate that it will
not always be this way. "A time will come," we say to ourselves,
"when we will unmake this world in which we are battered between long burden and brief delight, and will live in pleasure
for all our days." The belief in the possibility of long-lasting,
high-flown pleasures is a deceptive but adaptive flimflam. It 
1 72 
seems that nature did not make us to feel too good for too long,
which would be no good for the survival of the species, but
only to feel good enough for long enough to keep us from
complaining that we do not feel good all the time.
In the workaday world, complainers will not go far. When
someone asks how you are doing, you had better be wise
enough to reply, "I can't complain." If you do complain, even
justifiably, people will stop asking how you are doing. Complaining will not help you succeed and influence people. You
can complain to your physician or psychiatrist because they are
paid to hear you complain. But you cannot complain to your
boss or your friends, if you have any. You will soon be dismissed from your job and dropped from the social register.
Then you will be left alone with your complaints and no one to
listen to them. Perhaps then the message will sink into your
head: If you do not feel good enough for long enough, you
should act as if you do and even think as if you do. That is the
way to get yourself to feel good enough for long enough and
stop you from complaining for good, as any self-improvement
book can affirm. But should you not improve, someone must
assume the blame. And that someone will be you. This is
monumentally so if you are a pessimist or a depressive. Should
you conclude that life is objectionable or that nothing matters-do not waste our time with your nonsense. We are on
our way to the future, and the philosophically disheartening or
the emotionally impaired are not going to hinder our progress.
If you cannot say something positive, or at least equivocal, keep
it to yourself. Pessimists and depressives need not apply for a
position in the enterprise of life. You have two choices: Start
thinking the way God and your society want you to think or be
forsaken by all. The decision is yours, since you are a free agent
who can choose to rejoin our fabricated world or stubbornly
insist on ... what? That we should mollycoddle non-positive 
173
thinkers like you or rethink how the whole world transacts its
business? That we should start over from scratch? Or that we
should go extinct? Try to be realistic. We did the best we could
with the tools we had. After all, we are only human, as we like
to say. Our world may not be in accord with nature's way, but
it did develop organically according to our consciousness,
which delivered us to a lofty prominence over the Creation.
The whole thing just took on a life of its own, and nothing is
going to stop it anytime soon. There can be no starting over and
no going back. No major readjustments are up for a vote. And
no melancholic head-case is going to bad-mouth our catastrophe. The universe was created by the Creator, damn it. We live
in a country we love and that loves us back. We have families
and friends and jobs that make it all worthwhile. We are somebodies, not a bunch of nobodies without names or numbers or
retirement plans. None of this is going to be overhauled by a
thought criminal who contends that the world is not doubleplusgood and never will be. Our lives may not be unflawedthat would deny us a better future to work toward-but if this
charade is good enough for us, then it should be good enough
for you. So if you cannot get your mind right, try walking away.
You will find no place to go and no one who will have you.
You will find only the same old trap the world over. Lighten up
or leave us alone. You will never get us to give up our hopes.
You will never get us to wake up from our dreams. We are not
contradictory beings whose continuance only worsens our
plight as mutants who embody the contorted logic of a paradox. Such opinions will not be accredited by institutions of authority or by the middling run of humanity. To lay it on the
line, whatever thoughts may enter your chemically imbalanced
brain are invalid, inauthentic, or whatever dismissive term we
care to hang on you, who are only "one of those people." So
start pretending that you feel good enough for long enough, 
174 
stop your complaining, and get back in line. If you are not as
strong as Samson-that no-good suicide and slaughterer of Philistines-then get loaded to the gills and return to the trap. Keep
your medicine cabinet and your liquor cabinet well stocked,
just like the rest of us. Come on and join the party. No pessimists or depressives invited. Do you think we are morons? We
know all about those complaints of yours. The only difference
is that we have sense enough and feel good enough for long
enough not to speak of them. Keep your powder dry and your
brains blocked. Our shibboleth: "Up the Conspiracy and down
with Consciousness."
Disillusionment
Antagonistic to any somber ideations, humankind has trained
itself to ingest ever-increasing disillusionments and metabolize
them without any impairment to its system. By means of selfmastery through conscious autosuggestion, or by whatever
means, the biblical Genesis and all other fables of origination
have been unproblematically reduced to mythic precursors of
the Big Bang theory and the primordial soup. Pantheon after
pantheon has been belittled into "things people used to believe
in." And supplications to the Divine are murmured only inside
the tents of faith healers or in the minds of the desperate.
The only constraint on disillusionment is the following: It
must creep along so sluggishly that almost none can mark its
movement. Anyone caught trying to accelerate the progress of
disillusionment will be reprimanded and told to sit in the corner, if only in free-world nations where the Church and the
State have lost the clout to kill or torture dissenters. A sign of
progress, some would say. But sufferance of renegade minds
should not lead us into premature self-congratulation. The rate
at which our kind plods toward disillusionment is geologically
slow, and humanity can be cocksure of its death by natural 
1 75
causes or an "act of God" before it travels very far toward that
beatific day when with one voice it might exclaim, "Enough of
this error of conscious life. It shall be passed down no longer to
those innocents unborn."
In "The Last Messiah," Zapffe conjectures that with the passing
of generations the more profligate will become humanity's
means of hiding its disillusionments from itself: the more
brainless and delusive its isolation from the actualities of existence; the more stupefying and uncouth its distractions from
the startling and dreadful; the more heavy-handed and madcap
its anchorings in unreality; and the more callous, self-mocking,
and detached from life its sublimations in art. These developments will not make us any more paradoxical in our being, but
they could make all manifestations of our paradoxical nature
less effective and more aberrant. Speaking in terms of his time,
and ours, Zapffe writes in "The Last Messiah" of our rising
"spiritual unemployrnent. "
The absence of naturally (biologically) based spiritual activity
shows up, for example, in the pervasive recourse to distraction
(entertainment, sport, radio--the "rhythm of the times") . Terms
for anchoring are not as favorable-all the inherited, collective
systems of anchorings are punctured by criticism, and anxiety, disgust, confusion, despair leaking in through the rifts ("corpses in
the cargo"). Communism and psychoanalysis, however incommensurable otherwise, both attempt (as Communism also has a spiritual reflection) by novel means to vary the old escape anew;
applying, respectively, violence and guile to make humans biologically fit by ensnaring their critical surplus of cognition. The idea,
in either case, is uncannily logical. But again, it cannot yield a final
solution. Though a deliberate degeneration to a more viable nadir
may certainly save the species in the short run, it will hy its nature
be unable to find peace in such resignation, or indeed find any
peace at all. ... 

If we continue on these considerations to the bitter end, then
the conclusion is not in doubt. As long as humankind recklessly
proceeds in the fateful delusion of being biologically fated for triumph, nothing essential will change. As the numbers mount and
the spiritual atmosphere thickens, the techniques of protection
must assume an increasingly brutal character.
Rather than being a visionary or a prophet, Zapffe was an analyst of disaster, and his pessimism is nothing if not down to
earth.
Pressurized
The Romanian-born French writer E. M. Cioran counted among
his greatest accomplishments breaking himself of the habit of
cigarette smoking and the fact that he never became a parent.
Nothing in Cioran's file would lead one to think he was ever
tempted to have children. His remark was a derision of people
whose fecundity had swollen a world he would rather have seen
in ashes. A maestro of pessimism, Cioran published several volumes of philosophical essays and aphorisms that assaulted what
he considered the inexcusable crumminess of all creation. Contained in his works is an ample stock of quotable outbursts, any
one of which could serve as a synopsis of his conviction that
human existence was a wrong tum made by the universe. "Life,"
he wrote, "is an uprising within the inorganic, a tragic leap out of
the inert-life is matter animated and, it must be said, spoiled by
pain." But that was just his opinion.
Those who feel they have free will, meaning everyone, also
feel they are free to have any opinion they want on any issue before them. They are like those "believers in anything" already
mentioned who may have an opinion about whatever they believe to be true. As we know, the premier opinion that has held
in all time and places is that there is some sure reason for the
continuance of the human species. This opinion is so prevailing 
177
that it is usually assumed to be a fact and not an opinion. In
Reason's Grief: An Essay on Tragedy and Value (2006)1 George
W. Harris propounds this opinion most poignantly: "While we
might ... admit that the existence of human and animal suffering is itself a tragedy, it would be a greater tragedy still to end it
all. How can we account for this tragic sense, the sense that
something would be lost with such a termination?" That it
would be a greater tragedy to end all animal and human suffering than to have it continue is an opinion stated as a fact. Granting that "something would be lost with such a termination," it
remains to be established whether or not that "something'' were
better let go than kept going. And that this termination inspires
in us a tragic sense for which we need to account is also only
Harris's opinion-one that he later, with disarming honesty,
concedes is reserved for those who are fortunate enough to have
lives they believe are worth having; otherwise, what he calls the
"apocalyptic option" would be all right.
Nothing definitive supports the opinion that humanity should
persist in being, just as nothing definitive supports the opinion
that humanity should cease to exist. In place of universally convincing reasons in this matter, or even commonsense thought,
there is pressure. Thus, people who hold the opinion that the
human race should go extinct are pressured by the bad opinion
of almost all others to excoriate themselves as wrong in having
this opinion. All said, the opinion of an anti-natalist is not reckoned a praiseworthy one in this world, and anti-natalists are cognizant of this fact. U nlikewise, pro-natalists are not at all
cognizant that their opinion that procreation is all right is not
praiseworthy either.
Opinion: There are no praiseworthy incentives to reproduce. For pro-natalists, children are only a means to an end, and
none of those ends is praiseworthy. They are the ends of people 
THE CONSPI RACY AGAINST THE HUMAN RACE
who already exist, a condition that automatically makes them
prejudiced in favor of existence. Yet even though these people
think that being alive is all right, they are not at a loss to think
of reasons why in some cases it would be better not to have
been. They can only hope that their children will not be one of
those cases, for their sake as well as for the sake of their offspring. To have a praiseworthy incentive for bearing a child,
one would first have to prove that child to be an end in itself,
which no one can prove about anything, least of all about
something that does not yet exist. You could argue, of course,
that a child is an end in itself and is a good in itself. And you
could go on arguing until the child ages to death or sickens to
death or has a fatal vehicular misadventure. But you cannot argue that anyone comes to an end that is a good in itself. You
can only accept that someday he or she will come to an end
that is an end in itself, which, as people sometimes say, may be
for the best.
In place of arguments pro or con, pressure is brought to
bear on breeders-in-waiting to be of the opinion that there is
indeed a plethora of praiseworthy incentives for making more
of us. The pressure put upon them, biology notwithstanding,
takes the guise of the good opinion of others who want them to
think, and who themselves think, they are right in having the
opinion that procreation is all right. Some may resist this pressure, but they will not be roundly praised for doing so, although
they may receive a dispensation if the product of their union is
likely to be defective.
Among the least praiseworthy incentives to reproduce are
parents' pipe dreams of posterity-that egoistic compulsion to
send emissaries into the future who will certify that their makers once lived and still live on, if only in photographs and home
movies. Vying for an even less praiseworthy incentive to reproduce is the sometimes irresistible prospect of taking pride in 
179
one's children as consumer goods, trinkets or tie-clips, personal
accessories that may be shown off around town. But primary
among the pressures to propagate is this: To become formally
integrated into a society, one must offer it a blood sacrifice. As
David Benatar has alleged in Better Never to Have Been, all procreators have red hands, morally and ethically speaking.
Naturally, the average set of parents is able to conceive of
less reprehensible, but still not praiseworthy, incentives for reproduction. Among these are the urgency to beat the biological
clock or abandon all hope for the legendary enjoyments of the
parental role; the desire to solidify a spousal relationship; the
wish to please one's own parents with grandchildren; the need of
an insurance policy that one's offspring will probably feel obligated to pay off once their begetters are in their dotage; the
quelling of a sense of guilt or selfishness for not having done their
duty as human beings; and the squelching of that pathos which is
associated with the childless.3
Such are some of the non-praiseworthy incentives of those
who would fertilize the future. And they are all pressures of
one kind or another. These pressures build up in people
throughout their lifetimes and cry to be released, just as our
bowels cry to be released to avoid the discomfort of a fecal
build-up. And who, if they could help it, wants the discomfort
of a fecal build-up? So we make bowel movements to relieve
this pressure. Similarly, quite a few people make gardens because they cannot withstand the pressure of not making a garden. Others commit murder because they cannot withstand the
pressure building up within them to kill someone, either a person known to them or a passing stranger. And so on. Our whole
lives consist of pressures to make metaphorical as well as actual
bowel movements. Releasing these pressures can have greater
or lesser consequences in the scheme of our lives. But they are
all bowel-movement pressures of some kind. At a certain age, 
180 
children are praised for making a bowel movement in the approved manner. Later on, the praise of others dies down for this
achievement and our bowel movements become our own business, although we may continue to praise ourselves for them.
Yet pressures go on influencing our lives, including pressures to
have some opinions rather than others, and the proper release
of these essentially bowel-movement pressures may once more
come up for praise, congratulations, and huzzahs of all kinds.
No different from other species on this planet, the human
race flourishes while it can, even though there is no praiseworthy incentive to do so. Nevertheless, we cannot count out the
possibility that with the passing of hundreds or thousands of
years we will attain immortality, or something close to it, which
would obviate our function as servants of our species whose
primary interests are to survive and reproduce ourselves. Let us
also presage that at this distant stage of human evolution we
have fully fathomed all material matters of the universe-its
beginning, its end, and all its workings. Having reached such an
intellectual apex, we would need only to bar from our thoughts
a single question, one to which there can be no positive answer
in either material or metaphysical terms. The question takes
various forms. We have already investigated one form of this
question: "What use is it to exist?" Herman T 0nnessen, in his
essay "Happiness Is for the Pigs: Philosophy versus Psychotherapy" (Journal of Existentialism, 1967), cites another form of the
question: "What is it all about?" He then explains the context
and significance of the question.
Mitja (in Brothers Karamazov) felt that though his question may be
absurd and senseless, yet he had to ask just that, and he had to ask it
in just that way. Socrates bandied about that an unexamined life is
not worthy of Man. And Aristotle saw Man's "proper" goal and
"proper" limit in the right exercise of those faculties which are
uniquely human. It is commonplace that men, unlike other living
organisms, are not equipped with built-in mechanisms for auto-

matic maintenance of their existence. Man would perish immediately if he were to respond to his environment exclusively in terms
of unlearned biologically inherited forms of behavior. In order to
survive, the human being must discover how various things around
as well as in him operate. And the place he occupies in the present
scheme of organic creation is the consequence of having learned
how to exploit his intellectual capacities for such discoveries .
Hence, more human than any other human longing is the pursuance
of a total view of Man's function--or malfunction-in the Universe, his possible place and importance in the widest conceivable
cosmic scheme. In other words it is the attempt to answer, or at least
articulate whatever questions are entailed in the dying groan of ontological despair: What is it all about? This may well prove biologically harmful or even fatal to Man. Intellectual honesty and Man's
high spiritual demands for order and meaning may drive Man to the
deepest antipathy to life and necessitate, as one existentialist
chooses to express it: "A no to this wild, banal, grotesque and loathsome carnival in the world's graveyard. " (Emphasis in original)
The quote at the end of this excerpt from Tonnessen's essay is
taken from Zapffe's On the Tragic. While Tonnessen believes
that "intellectual honesty" must lead to "ontological despair," ultimately his preference is for living the heroic life of a cleareyed desperado of pessimism-after the existential stylings of
Miguel de Unamuno, Albert Camus, William Brashear, Joshua
Foa Dienstag, and others-rather than wallowing in the selfdeceptive happiness of a human pig. In principle, there does
seem to be a moral divide between the way of the desperado
and that of the pig; practically, there is none. Both are spoiling
for survival in a MALIGNANTLY USELESS world. And survival is for the pigs.
Ask Professor Nobody about reasoning the state of our lives
to the limit. Tilting again toward stridency, here is what he has
to say on the subject in "Pessimism and Supernatural HorrorLecture Two." 

Dead bodies that walk in the night, living bodies suddenly possessed by new owners and deadly aspirations, bodies without sensible form, and a body of unnatural laws in accordance with
which tortures and executions are meted out-some examples of
the logic of supernatural horror. It is a logic founded on fear, a
logic whose sole principle states: "Existence equals nightmare."
Unless life is a dream, nothing makes sense. For as a reality, it is a
rank failure. A few more examples: a trusting soul catches the
night in a bad mood and must pay a dreadful price; another opens
the wrong door, sees something he should not have, and suffers
the consequences; still another walks down an unfamiliar street
... and is lost forever.
That we all deserve punishment by horror is as mystifying as it
is undeniable. To be an accomplice, however involuntarily, in a
reasonless non-reality is cause enough for the harshest sentencing.
But we have been trained so well to accept the "order" of an unreal world that we do not rebel against it. How could we? Where
pain and pleasure form a corrupt alliance against us, paradise and
hell are merely different divisions in the same monstrous bureaucracy. And between these two poles exists everything we know or
can ever know. It is not even possible to imagine a utopia, earthly
or otherwise, that can stand up under the mildest criticism. But
one must take into account the shocking fact that we live on a
world that spins. After considering this truth, nothing should
come as a surprise.
Still, on rare occasions we do overcome hopelessness or
velleity and make mutinous demands to live in a real world, one
that is at least episodically ordered to our advantage. But perhaps
it is only a demon of some kind that moves us to such idle insubordination, the more so to aggravate our condition in the unreal.
After all, is it not wondrous that we are allowed to be both witnesses and victims of the sepulchral pomp of wasting tissue? And
one thing we know is real: horror. It is so real, in fact, that we
cannot be sure it could not exist without us. Yes, it needs our
imaginations and our consciousness, but it does not ask or require
our consent to use them. Indeed, horror operates with complete
autonomy. Generating ontological havoc, it is mephitic foam upon
which our lives merely float. And, ultimately, we must face up to
it: Horror is more real than we are. 
AUTOPSY ON A PUPPET:
AN ANATOMY OF THE
SUPERNATURAL
Atmosphere
Billions of years had to pass following the formation of the
earth before its atmosphere became ... atmospheric. This transition could only have occurred with the debut of consciousness-parent of all horrors and the matrix of atmosphere. With
our bodies bogged down in the ordure of this world, our new
faculty instigated the genesis of other worlds, invisible ontologies that infiltrated appearances. Now we could feel the presence of things beyond the reach of our physical senses. The
circumference of our fears dilated with further expansions of
consciousness. Under the cover of atmosphere there seemed to
be another side to the realm of being we knew, or thought we
knew. Seeing shadows in the moonlight and hearing leaves rustling in the wind, our ancestors impregnated these sights and
sounds with imaginings and apprehensions. Atmosphere had finally arrived, both foreshadowing horror and taking its substance from horror. Without this alliance, the first horror stories
could not have been told.
As the horror story matured and branched out, so did the
qualities of its atmosphere, most of all among the great names
of this literary genre. For these writers, the atmosphere of their
works is as unique as a signature or a fingerprint. It is the index 

of an identifiable consciousness that has been brewed from an
amalgam of sensations, memories, emotions, and everything else
that makes individuals what they are and predetermines what
they will express as artists. Thus Lovecraft, in a i 935 letter to
Catherine L. Moore, wrote these remarks on the weird story:
It must, if it is to be authentic art, form primarily the crystallization or symbolization of a definite human mood-not the attempted
delineation of events, since the "events" involved are of course
largely fictitious and impossible. These events should figure secondarily-atmosphere being first. All real art must somehow be connected with truth, and in the case of weird art the emphasis must
fall upon the one factor representing truth-certainly not the
events om but the mood of intense and fruitless human aspiration
typified by the pretended overturning of cosmic laws and the pretended transcending of possible human experience. (Lovecraft's emphasis)
The works in which Lovecraft most successfully put his theoretics of atmosphere into practice are paradigms of weird (or
supernatural horror) fiction. Yet he wrote himself off as a failure in his pursuit to get on paper what he had in his head and
strove to the end of his life to do what no other horror writer
had done before him nor will ever do: lay bare his consciousness in an artifact. By the stress he placed on atmosphere, Lovecraft showed the way to an analysis of this element in horror
literature, and, by extension, to an evaluation of the genre as a
whole. While his personal use for atmosphere was to facilitate a
sense of cosmic laws being overturned and human experience
being transcended, he also defined the general purpose of atmosphere in horror stories: to give consistency (mood) to an
imagined world in which we can at least pretend to escape
from our mere humanity and enter into spaces where the human has no place and dies to itself either weeping or screaming
or in awe at the horror of existence. Here lies the paradox of
consuming horror as an escapist venture. 
 185
The secret of atmosphere in supernatural horror is simplicity
itself. Already spoken of in the first paragraph of this chapter, it
is here repeated and made categorical: Atmosphere is created
by anything that suggests an ominous state of affairs beyond
what our senses perceive and our minds can fully comprehend.
It is the signature motif that Schopenhauer made discernible in
pessimism-that behind the scenes of life there is something
pernicious that makes a nightmare of our world. This something, this ominous state of affairs beyond what our senses perceive and our minds can comprehend, has previously been
discussed in connection with Blackwood's "The Willows." In
this story, Blackwood was careful not to dissipate with explanatory details the atmosphere he created. Lovecraft admired this
work for its evocation of "nameless presences" that remain
nameless and yet are powerfully felt. This is not a rule that
Lovecraft himself often followed, as is particularly evident in
his later stories. In such works as "The Dunwich Horror" and At
the Mountains of Madness, Lovecraft details and analyzes and,
unlike Blackwood in the "The Willows," names the monstrosities at the center of these narratives. Nevertheless, there are always unparalleled images and ideas in Lovecraft's fiction that
stay with the reader and instill a feeling of unknown horrors
surpassing those that have been made known.
From the perspective of atmosphere, horror fiction may be
dated only as far back as the novels of Ann Radcliffe, which
contain enough visionary mood to make up for their bodiceripper plots. Radcliffe's genius resided in turning a rage in the
late eighteenth century for the picturesque in natural topographies into one that emphasized sublime dread as an aesthetic.
Her works are known for the descriptions they contain of landscapes featuring mountains of intimidating height, valleys vast
and deep, and moody twilights. Here quoted is such a view as 
186 
witnessed by Emily St. Aubert, the heroine of Radcliffe's most
popular novel, The Mysteries of Udolpho (1794). In this scene,
Montoni, the story's malefactor, is delivering Emily and her
aunt to his home. (Please bear with yet a few more long excerpts, ones from a long novel in which Radcliffe at length and
often entertained her readers with sublimely thrilling carriage
rides.)
Towards the close of day, the road wound into a deep valley.
Mountains, whose shaggy steeps appeared to be inaccessible, almost surrounded it. To the east, a vista opened, that exhibited the
Apennines in their darkest horrors; and the long perspective of retiring summits, rising over each other, their ridges clothed with
pines, exhibited a stronger image of grandeur, than any that Emily
had yet seen. The sun had just sunk below the top of the mountains she was descending, whose long shadow stretched athwart
the valley, but his sloping rays, shooting through an opening of the
cliffs, touched with a yellow gleam the summits of the forest, that
hung upon the opposite steeps, and streamed in full splendour
upon the towers and battlements of a castle, that spread its extensive ramparts along the brow of a precipice above. The splendour
of these illumined objects was heightened by the contrasted shade,
which involved the valley below.
"There," said Montoni, speaking for the first time in several
hours, "is Udolpho."
Emily's initial sighting of Udolpho elicits the same kind of tingling sensation she feels for nature's mixed effects of minatory
gigantism and soul-striking splendor.
Emily gazed with melancholy awe upon the castle, which she understood to be Montoni's; for, though it was now lighted up by
the setting sun, the gothic greatness of its features, and its mouldering walls of dark grey stone, rendered it a gloomy and sublime
object. As she did, the light died away on its walls, leaving a melancholy purple tint, which spread deeper and deeper, as the thin
vapour crept up the mountain, while the battlements above were
still tipped with splendour. From those, too, the rays soon faded,
and the whole edifice was invested with the solemn duskiness of 
87
evening. Silent, lonely, and sublime, it seemed to stand the sovereign of the scene, and to frown defiance on all, who dared to invade its solitary reign. As the twilight deepened, its features
became more awful in obscurity, and Emily continued to gaze, till
its clustering towers were alone seen, rising over the tops of the
woods, beneath whose thick shade the carriages soon after began
to ascend.
The extent and darkness of these tall woods awakened terrific
images in her mind, and she almost expected to see banditti start
up from under the trees. At length, the carriages emerged upon a
heathy rock, and, soon after, reached the castle gates, where the
deep tone of the portal bell, which was struck upon to give notice
of their arrival, increased the fearful emotions, that had assailed
Emily. While they waited till the servant within should come to
open the gates, she anxiously surveyed the edifice: b ut the gloom,
that overspread it, allowed her to distinguish little more than a
part of its outline, with the massy walls of the ramparts, and to
know, that it was vast, ancient and dreary. From the parts she saw,
she judged of the heavy strength and extent of the whole. The
gateway before her, leading into the courts, was of gigantic size,
and was defended by two round towers, crowned by overhanging
turrets, embattled, where, instead of banners, now waved long
grass and wild plants, that had taken root among the mouldering
stones, and which seemed to sigh, as the breeze rolled past, over
the desolation around them. The towers were united by a curtain,
pierced and embattled also, below which appeared the pointed
arch of a huge portcullis, surmounting the gates: from these, the
walls of the ramparts extended to other towers, overlooking the
precipice, whose shattered outline, appearing on a gleam, that lingered in the west, told of the ravages of war.-Beyond these all
was lost in the obscurity of evening.
The horrid vicissitudes of Emily's stay at Udolpho further extend the spirit-stirring and densely atmospheric world in which
she is immersed. To move along the plots of her essentially romantic narratives, Radcliffe entrapped her heroines in castles so
great and gloomy that their dungeons seem to have dungeons
and their towers appear to the imagination to sprout supple-
188 
mentary towers into infinity. Within such gargantuan settings,
Radcliffe's young women are terrorized by men of a wicked nature. They are also terrorized by simulacra of the supernatural
that are later exposed as being natural in origin. Then they are
rescued by their beloveds and, presumably, live gladsome lives
unmarred by their traumatic experiences.
Some readers and critics disapprove of Radcliffe's ex post
facto rationalizing of what seemed at the time to have been depictions of bona fide supernatural events, which for them dispels
much of the frightful atmosphere she worked so diligently to
create. The protest is that if she did not explain her way back to
nature, her protagonists would have had to look into the face of
a metaphysical horror that challenges one's concept of reality
rather than the lesser horror of having to marry a man of bad
character. It must seem a paradox, then, that Radcliffe is credited
here as the parent of supernatural atmosphere when there are no
supernatural happenings in her narratives. The resolution to this
paradox is discussed in the section Supernaturalism later in this
chapter. For now, let us listen to what Lovecraft had to say about
Radcliffe as an author "who set new and higher standards in the
domain of macabre and fear-inspiring atmosphere despite a provoking custom of destroying her own phantoms at the last
through labored mechanical explanations."
To the familiar Gothic trappings of her predecessors Mrs. Radcliffe added a genuine sense of the unearthly in scene and incident
which closely approached genius; every touch of setting and action contributing artistically to the impression of illimitable frightfulness which she wished to convey. A few sinister details like a
track of blood on castle stairs, a groan from a distant vault, or a
weird song in a nocturnal forest can with her conjure up the most
powerful images of imminent horror; surpassing by far the extravagant and toilsome elaborations of others. Nor are these images in themselves any the less potent because they are explained
away before the end of the novel. (Supernatural Horror in Literature, 1 927; revised 1 933-35) 
 189
The only real disappointment of Radcliffe's novels is that she
did not follow through on the death threats to her main characters with their actual deaths, which, considering each of her
novels in whole, burns off some of their atmospheric set-up
with the resplendent sun of a happy ending. But to leave her
heroines or heroes lying dead at the end of one of her narratives
would have violated the terms of the genre of Gothic romance
in which she wrote. And that would truly have been a blemish
on her record as an adept storyteller. Atmospherically, death
itself had not yet been added as an element to concentrate the
effect of a horror tale.
The next innovation in atmosphere began with Poe in the early
nineteenth century. Poe was familiar with Radcliffe's works,
which laid the groundwork of the Gothic genre and registered
brisk sales. Possibly in reaction to Radcliffe, he turned the world
of scenic thrills and salvation upside down in "The Fall of the
House of Usher." The story begins at evening as its narrator approaches on horseback a secluded mansion flanked by a
swampy and putrid-looking tarn. While the House of Usher
may at first seem to be oozing an enchanting Gothic atmosphere, the narrator goes out of his way to argue that this is not
so. The dilapidated manse, which has a deep crack running
across its fa<;ade, is not sublimely desolate in the manner of the
ruined castles of Radcliffe's novels. It is rather a locus of indomitable despair. Here is how we see the Usher estate through
the eyes of the character who has come to visit the old pile.
I know not how it was-but, with the first glimpse of the building,
a sense of insufferable gloom pervaded my spirit I say insufferable;
for the feeling was unrelieved by any of that half-pleasurable, because poetic, sentiment, with which the mind usually receives
even the sternest natural images of the desolate or terrible. I looked
upon the scene before me--upon the mere house, and the simple
landscape features of the domain-upon the bleak walls-upon 
1 90 
the vacant eye-like windows-upon a few rank sedges-and upon
a few white trunks of decayed trees-with an utter depression of
soul which I can compare to no earthly sensation more properly
than to the after-dream of the reveler upon opium-the bitter
lapse into everyday life-the hideous dropping off of the veil.
There was an iciness, a sinking, a sickening of the heart-an unredeemed dreariness of thought which no goading of the imagination
could torture into aught of the sublime. What was it-I paused to
think-what was it that so unnerved me in the contemplation of
the House of Usher? It was a mystery all insoluble; nor could I
grapple with the shadowy fancies that crowded upon me as I pondered. I was forced to fall back upon the unsatisfactory conclusion,
that while, beyond doubt, there are combinations of very simple
natural objects which have the power of thus affecting us, still the
analysis of this power lies among considerations beyond our depth.
It was possible, I reflected, that a mere different arrangement of
the particulars of the scene, of the details of the picture, would be
sufficient to modify, or perhaps to annihilate its capacity for sorrowful impression; and, acting upon this idea, I reined my horse to
the precipitous brink of a black and lurid tarn that lay in unruffled
lustre by the dwelling, and gazed down-but with a shudder even
more thrilling than before-upon the remodeled and inverted images of the grey sedge, and the ghastly tree-stems, and the vacant
and eye-like windows.
However the narrator tries to relish rather than be distraught by
the atmosphere of the house and its bedraggled grounds, he cannot do so. From the tenor of this beginning, the reader can expect no saving outcome. The atmosphere Poe created in the
introductory section of his greatest tale is genuinely atmospheric
because it bodes doom, which can mean only one thing-death.
And in "The Fall of the House of Usher" such is the portion of
Roderick and Madeline, the brother and sister who are the last
of their family to occupy the hereditary domicile. Furthermore,
the precarious condition of the house worsens to the point
where the structure itself begins to cave. To thicken this climate
of demise, the light of a blood-red moon shines through a wid-
 191
ening breach in the masonry of the Usher abode as it sinks stone
by stone beneath the still surface of the noxious tarn. Earlier the
narrator told us of the identity that the local townspeople perceived between the House of Usher and its inhabitants. Admirably, Poe's tale culminates in the extinction of both. With this
conclusion, Radcliffe's picturesque Gothic world had been supplanted by an atmosphere spilling out of death-the most ominous state of affairs with which we must deal.
In his tales, Poe created a world that is wholly evil, desolate,
and doomed. These qualities give consistency to his imagined
world. And there is no escape from this world, only a fall into
it. Poe's enclosure of the reader in an environment without an
exit distinguishes his works from those of earlier writers like
Radcliffe. His characters do not take us from place to place
looking at the scenery. They are inside a world that has no outside--no well-mapped places from which one can come and
none to which one can go. The reader of Poe never has the
sense that anything exists outside the frame of his narratives.
What they suggest is that the only thing beyond what our
senses can perceive and our mind can fully comprehend is
blackness, nothing. It is the same in those most atmospheric of
experiences we all know-dreams.
When you dream, you do not feel that anything exists
which is not in your immediate surroundings. You cannot be
anywhere in a dream except the place you are already in. Besides the psychological entrapment of dreams, there is also their
fundamental strangeness, and Poe was expert at insinuating this
phenomenon into his stories. Reading "The Fall of the House of
Usher" is like having a lucid dream: We know that everything
we see is unreal, yet there is paradoxically a heightened reality
to it all. To awaken from such a dream is to lose your freedom
from yourself and return to an onerous embodiment where 

consciousness is a tragedy and you cannot soar unscathed within
an atmosphere of death. You can only die.
It was almost a century after the 1839 publication of "The Fall
of the House of Usher" that Lovecraft took a giant step in the
art of atmospherics with his "Call of Cthulhu." Well known as
they may be to readers of horror fiction, the story's introductory sentences require transcription here.
The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability
of the human mind to correlate all its contents. We live on a
placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and
it was not meant that we should voyage far. The sciences, each
straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but
some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open
up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position
therein, that we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee
from the deadly light into the peace and safety of a new dark age.
From Lovecraft's overture to this tale, the reader may surmise
that besides the death of a character or two, the human race itself may go under by voyaging too far on the "black seas of infinity." While the above statement is abstract, it is all the more
atmospheric for being so, and we are ardent to read what "dissociated knowledge," not a stunningly evocative phrase, has
been pieced together by one Francis Wayland Thurston, who is
displaced from his old reality and set into an ill-starred fictional
world that makes all of his former days seem a heaven of naivete.
"I have looked upon all that the universe has to hold of horror," F. W. Thurston writes after he has pieced together the
puzzle, "and even the skies of spring and the flowers of summer
must ever afterward be poison to me." In other words, he has
done what no one has been in a position to do before himsort out the worst of existence from any compensatory dividends, a process which leads him to conclude that life is a ma-
193
lignancy it were better not to know. This is Lovecraft's atmosphere-that of a world in which the "frightful position" he has
placed all human existence could lead to universal madness or
extinction at a moment's notice. Through this atmosphere,
Lovecraft gives consistency to an imagined world where there is
greatness in knowing too much of the horror of a planet in the
shadow of Cthulhu and all that this implies about our existence. As for those people who still go about their ordinary, average business complacently enjoying the skies of spring and the
flowers of summer, innocently unaware of the monstrosities
with which they coexist-they are children. They have no idea
that there is nothing worth living for in Lovecraft's world. They
are not in its atmosphere. Yet at any time they could be. It
must be remembered that the atmosphere of a supernatural
world and its horror exists only in the human imagination.
There is nothing like it in nature, nor can nature provoke it. It
is a contrivance of our consciousness, and only we can know it
among all the organisms of the earth. We are alone in our
minds with the atmosphere of a supernatural world and its horror. We are both its creators and what it has created-uncanny
things that have nothing to do with the rest of creation.
Theme
The literary world may be divided into two unequal groups: the
insiders and the outsiders. The former are many and the latter
are few. The placement of a given writer into one group or the
other could be approached by assessing the consciousness of
that writer as it is betrayed by various components of his work,
including verbal style, general tone of voice, selection of subjects and themes, etc. As any reader knows, such things do vary
among authors. To pin any of them down within a capricious
or oneiric taxonomy of insiders and outsiders would then perforce become an experiment in uselessness. 
194 
Ernest Hemingway, William Faulkner, Jean-Paul Sartre,
Samuel Beckett, T. S. Eliot, Knut Hamsun, Hermann Hesse:
who is on the inside and who is on the outside? The brain reels
when considering well-known works by these writers, as they
seem to express sensibilities at several arms' length from those
of average mortals. Immediately, we recall Hemingway's story
"A Clean, Well-Lighted Place," which ends with a travesty of
the Lord's Prayer: "Our nada who art in nada, nada be thy
name." Then our thoughts tum to the collection of degenerates
in Faulkner's novels, which do not seem intent on showing off
the nobler side, if there is one, of the human race. Nor should
we forget Eliot's homage to entropy, The Waste Land (1922)1 or
the unbalanced protagonists who lead us through Hamsun's
Hunger (1890)1 Hesse's Steppenwolf (1928), Sartre's Nausea
(1938)1 and the entire output of Beckett. Conveniently, the
status of these authors-insider or outsider-has been adjudicated for us by the Swedish committees that dispensed to each
of them a Nobel Prize in literature, which is annually given out
to authors who produce "the most outstanding work of an idealistic tendency."
But should these literary greats be classed as insiders exclusively because they received a prize from a panel of Swedish
judges? Some would say "yes," but not entirely because of the
Nobel. Some would say "no," despite the Nobel.1 These conflicting opinions leave our job unfinished insofar as determining
the consciousness of an author to be that of an insider or an
outsider. To expedite this inquest, we could use a candidate
whose credentials unambiguously place him in the latter group.
To fill this position, any number of worthy outsiders could be
named. One of them is Roland Topor, whose short horror novel
The Tenant (1964) is a document that expresses the consciousness of an unimpeachable outsider. To discern with a modest
confidence what places a writer on the inside or the outside, 
 195
The Tenant will be compared with another short novel that
shares its theme, One, No One, and One Hundred Thousand
(1926) by the Nobel Prize-winning Luigi Pirandello. In itself,
theme is no giveaway of an author's consciousness. What counts
is how that theme is resolved. Pirandello's resolution parades
the symptoms of "an idealistic tendency," while Topor's takes
the anti-idealist position.
The theme of One, No One, and One Hundred Thousand is explicitly that of the self as a falsehood born of our systems of
perception and cognition. In contrast to the dogma of the many,
as Pirandello's narrator and leading character Vitangelo Moscarda comes to appreciate, the self is an insubstantial construct
invented to lend coherence and meaning to an existence that is
actually chaotic and meaningless. While we all have bodies, we
also recognize--only because we are occasionally forced to do
so-that they are unstable, damage-prone, and disposable phenomena. Simultaneously, we believe--until a malignant brain
lesion or some life-rending event causes us to question this belief-that our "selves" are more sturdy, enduring, and real than
the deteriorating tissue in which they are encased.
In One, No One, and One Hundred Thousand, Moscarda is
made aware of his misperception of his self, and by extension
of the entire world of forms in which the self functions, by a
misperception he has made about his body. Early in the story,
he believes his nose to be evenly structured on its right and left
sides. Then his wife tells him that his nose is not symmetrical
but is lower on the left side than on the right. Being an incurably pensive individual, Moscarda is troubled by his wife's remark; being an intellectually honest individual, he has to admit
it is true. That he misperceived this single feature of his appearance leads Moscarda to investigate what other delusions he has
been entertaining about his appearance throughout his life. He 

ascertains a constellation of them. After scrupulous selfexamination of his physical person, he grants that he is not the
man he thought he was. Now he believes he is an outsider to
himself-a figment in his own eyes and in the eyes of others.
Later, Moscarda is condemned to further revelations: "I still
believed this outsider was only one person: only one for everybody, as I thought I was only one for myself. But soon my horrible drama became more complicated." This occurs when he
discovers "the hundred thousand Moscardas that I was, not only
for the others but also for myself, all with this one name of Moscarda, ugly to the point of cruelty, all inside this poor body of
mine that was also one, one and, alas, no one .... "Fortunately
for Moscarda, and ruefully for the reader (at least the reader
who is an outsider), he comes to accept the unreality of everything he had conceived himself to be and becomes one with all
that exists. He no longer thinks but simply is. "This is the only
way I can live now. To be reborn moment by moment. To prevent thought from working again inside me .... "The last paragraph of the novel is an exaltation of his new state of existence.
The city is far away. There comes to me occasionally, upon the
vesper calm, the sound of its bells. I, however, no longer hear
those bells within me, but without, ringing for themselves and
perhaps trembling with joy in their resounding cavities, in a beautiful blue sky filled with a warm sun, to the twittering of swallows
or swaying heavily to wind and cloud, so high, so high, in their aerial belfries. To think of death, to pray. It may be that there is one
who yet has need of this, and it is to his need that the bells give
voice. I no longer have any such need, for the reason that I am dying every instant, and being born anew and without memories:
alive and whole, no longer in myself, but in everything outside.
(Trans. Samuel Putnam)
End of story. Things turn out all right for Moscarda. He is now
an outsider who has been saved. In his loss of a self, he brings to
mind U. G. Krishnamurti, John Wren-Lewis, and Suzanne 
 197
Segal-those unwitting prodigies who recovered from shocks to
their systems, following which the cognitive mechanisms which
produce a fictive ego shut down. In these instances, the individual who loses himself is the beneficiary of a rapturous payoff. This is truly a " good death" in which someone disappears as
a purported self and is reborn as ... no one. He is content just
to exist, and equally content not to exist.
But does anyone really believe that Luigi Pirandello knew
first-hand his protagonist's state of selfless beatitude? Or is it
more likely that he just imagined this ending of a decidedly "idealistic tendency"? Yet whether Pirandello actually experienced
or merely researched the ideal resolution to Moscarda's painful
self-consciousness, it is not a resolution available to the reader,
who could follow Moscarda's route to salvation step-by-step and
never be delivered to the promised land of the ego-dead. If it
were so, Pirandello would have discovered the most phenomenal cure ever known for the sufferings especially reserved for
humankind. He would have solved every scourge we face as a
species. As one might expect, though, he did no such thing. Instead, Pirandello resolved his fairy tale by lowering down a deus
ex machina. His book is a moral scam with mystical transcendence standing in for the prayer Moscarda says he no longer
needs. This is what the literary insider offers. In The Tenant, Roland Topor supplies the opposing view of the outsider.
When Pirandello's character Moscarda describes his escalating
puzzlement over his identity as a "horrible drama," his words
appear as a formality-a perfunctory gesture that fails to convey the uncanny nature of his situation. In The Tenant, on the
other hand, Topor affectingly dramatizes the horror of his nonhero Trelkovsky as he traverses the same terrain as his Italian
counterpart. A critical passage in Topor's novel begins with the
following sentence: '"At what precise moment,' Trelkovsky 

asked himself, 'does an individual cease to be the person he-­
and everyone else--believes himself to be?"'
A Parisian with a Slavic name, Trelkovsky is an outsider and
moves in a world where outsiders are persecuted, as they are in
the real world. Hoping to move into a new apartment-one
previously occupied by a woman named Simone Choule, who
was critically injured and not expected to live--he is made to
feel as if he is nobody by the landlord, Monsieur Zy, and then
by the other residents of this sinister place. By flexing their selfappointed grandiosity, Trelkovsky's persecutors can maintain
their own delusional status as somebodies, real persons who are
well-adapted to the hell they have created for themselves.
Anyone who is marked as being outside of the group is fair
game for those who would assert their reality over all others.
Yet they, too, are nobodies. If they were not, their persecutions
would not be required: They could pass their lives with a sure
mindfulness of their substance and value. But as any good Buddhist (or even Pirandello's Moscarda) could tell you, human beings have no more substance and value than anything else on
earth. The incapacity to repose alongside both the mountains
and the mold of this planet is the fountainhead of the torments
we wreak on one another. As long as we deny a person or
group the claim to be as right and as real as we are, so long may
we hold this dreamlike claim for ourselves alone. And it is the
duty of everyone to inculcate a sense of being empty of substance and value in those who are not emulations of them.
Without being consciously aware of it, Trelkovsky experiences an epiphany at the midpoint of the novel that is inspired
by his neighbors' behavior toward him: "'The bastards] ' Trelkovsky raged. 'The bastards] What the hell do they want-for
everyone to roll over and play dead] And even that probably
wouldn't be enough]"' He is more right than he knows. Because
what they want is for everyone to roll over and play them. 
199
Martians-they were all Martians ... . They were strangers on this
planet, but they refused to admit it. They played at being perfectly at home . . .. He was no different .... He belonged to their
species, but for some unknown reason he had been banished from
their company. They had no confidence in him. All they wanted
from him was obedience to their incongruous rules and their ridiculous laws. Ridiculous only to him, because he could never
fathom their intricacy and their subtlety.
Trelkovsky's neighbors cannot admit to themselves what he
comes to realize: Everybody is nobody; no one is empowered to
define who he or she is. But people do arrogate to themselves
the authority to make a ruling on who you are, and you will
stand mute before their bench. From the outset, Trelkovsky is
manipulated to accept this verdict; finally, he pronounces it on
himself. To his broken mind it seems that the only way to defy
his neighbors' murderous conspiracy against him is to cooperate
in it. He does this by allowing himself to fall from the window
of his apartment and through the glass roofing over the courtyard below. The first time does not kill him, so he hauls his
bloody anti-self back up the stairs, jeering at his neighbors who
have come out to lunge at his body with sharp objects. He then
falls a second time from the window. Following in the footsteps
of Gloria Beatty, he decides to call it quits in the world's lugubrious game. Interestingly, The Tenant concludes with the same
kind of leap beyond the mundane as does One, No One, and
One Hundred Thousand. Sadly for Trelkovsky, it is a leap in the
opposite direction. More accurately, it is a leap that does not deliver Topor's protagonist from his "horrible drama" but one that
catapults him into the outermost nightmare of nobodies.
As an insider, Pirandello resolved the theme of One, No
One, and One Hundred Thousand in a spirit-lifting mode. Imbued with a different consciousness, the outsider can only give
us resolutions of a miserablist nature. For the past few slivers of
human history, those of us living in what is termed the free 
200 
world have been allowed to hold disparate worldviews, but
only on the condition that they affirm, directly or indirectly, the
survival of the species. They must not be pessimistic, nihilistic,
or in any respect skeptical about the livability of human life.
Such perspectives might well be valued by outsiders, but insiders, who form the preponderant division of humankind, will
not incorporate the outsider's stark attitudes and unhappy endings into their philosophies, ideologies, national policies, or fraternal by-laws. Both Pirandello and Topor dealt with the
identical theme: the transformative dissolution of one's selfconcept. The former writer ended his story with a portrait of a
man who joyously transcends himself by becoming the "no one"
in the novel's title. This resolution has already been deplored as
a put-up job. An insider might say as much about the ending of
Topor's novel, which implies a descent into nightmare that
Trelkovsky never saw coming.
In the epilogue to The Tenant, it turns out that T relkovsky
survives what should have been his death-plunge. But he does
so in a strange way. Regaining consciousness in a hospital bed,
he sees he has a visitor. And now everything comes home to
him. (Anyone can tell where this is going.) The hospital bed
where he now reclines is the same one that, at the beginning of
the story, he stood beside as he looked over the bandage-hidden
body of his apartment's former tenant, whom he wanted to see
for himself was not going to recover from her injuries and try to
reclaim her old lodgings. She, too, had fallen from the window
of that shabby residence. The newly bedridden patient, like the
one before, identifies to his horror the one who has come to
visit him. It is himself. Immobilized by his injuries and his face
dressed to expose only one eye and an opening for his mouth,
he realizes that he has changed places with the woman whose
apartment he once coveted. Perhaps not for the first time, as he
might be caught in a loop of reincarnations, he has come to be 
 201
at his own bedside. Realizing what has happened to him, the
one in the bed, he already knows what is going to happen to
the one standing over him, the one who is not him anymore,
and yet is. Trelkovsky has now solved his (and Moscarda's) riddle: "At what precise moment does an individual cease to be
the person he--and everyone else--believes himself to be?"
Answer: at the moment when an individual becomes conscious
that he has been trapped in a paradox of identity and there is
no way out for him as long as he believes himself to be something he is not. Ask any puppet that thinks it is a person.
As neither Pirandello nor Topor underwent the transformative
dissolution of the self-concept that is the common theme of
their stories-it would be the high point of each man's biography if they had-are they not equally disingenuous? The answer to that question would seem to turn upon which author's
representation of the world you deem to be more symbolically
well-founded: ending one's days in serene communion with all
that makes up the world ... or trapped in a damaged body in a
hospital bed, unable to do anything but scream at the sight of a
clueless wraith, the nobody who was you in the dream that was
your life. Whichever conclusion to these thematically analogous
stories appears more faithful to human experience depends on
who you are ... or who you think you are. This is a very Pirandellian theme.
While Toper's vision seems empirically sturdier, Pirandello's
is the crowd favorite. To receive the prize Pirandello awards
Moscarda, if only for a moment before one's death, would make
amends for a lifetime of lashings. Grievously, just because
something is a desideratum does not mean that believing in it
will save you. But Pirandello and his kind want you, and themselves, to die trying. All Topor and his kind have to say is that
you should always have your affairs in order, which may bring 
202 
you some peace of mind if you are confined to a hospital bed
... or only looking for a new apartment.
Characters
In his essay "The Undelivered," Cioran wrote: "The more we
consider the Buddha's last exhortation, 'Death is inherent in all
created things; labor ceaselessly for your salvation, ' the more we
are troubled by the impossibility of feeling ourselves as an aggregate, a transitory if not fortuitous convergence of elements." Cioran could not have been more right about the impossibility of
feeling oneself to be a thing of parts, a being made as it is made.
Transporting our selves to and fro on the earth and walking up
and down upon it, we are doggedly believable characters, although we are not provably anything more than that. Yet we do
seem to be more than that, and seeming is enough for us to get
by as we have all these years.
In the course of our disillusionments, we have confessed to
being bodies made of elementary particles just like everything
else. But we must stop short of any tidings that would put us on
a par with bacteria and beer mugs. That would be to skyrocket
disillusionment out of the atmosphere, leaving us without a
speck of our invaluable selves and the games they play. One
game that most writers of horror fiction play with their characters is called Good versus Evil. And they play it as if it were the
only game in town. Certainly it is the oldest game in town, the
one we have relied on for much of our characterization from the
time we first knew who we were, or thought we did. A few horror writers, though, play a different game, one in which, as Poe
wrote, "Horror is the soul of the plot" rather than believable
characters. The game of Good versus Evil is about horror in the
world, and its players, its characters, are given a fighting chance.
The other game is about the horror of the world, and none of its
players has a chance, unless by pure chance. 
 203
For example, compare two horror novels that presume the
reality of supernatural possession-William Peter Blatty's The
Exorcist (1971) and Lovecraft's The Case of Charles Dexter Ward
(written 1 927; published posthumously, 1941). In the world of
Blatty's Good-versus-Evil novel, certain believable characters are
dressed for doom and others for survival. (This is a formulaic
element of nearly all popular horror novels.) Two priests, Frs.
Karras and Merrin, give their lives to save Regan, a believable
characterization of a young girl whose body, and perhaps her
soul-the relationship between body and soul among Christian
sects is not consistent-has been possessed by a demon or demons. The deaths of these priests are acceptable to readers as
part of the story's formula, despite the fact that they are the sort
of characters whom ordinary folk care about. Burke Dennings,
the director of the movie in which Regan's actress mother Chris
MacN eill stars, is murdered by the possessed Regan. He is not a
terribly likeable fellow, being a profane and belligerent drunk, so
the function he serves is that of a character who can be killed off
to advance the narrative in a shocking direction, since the reader
does not care much about him, however believable he may be.
This is very acceptable to readers, who are within their rights to
expect at least one person to be slain over the course of a horror
novel. Such is the way that the greater part of those who patronize works of fiction like to see writers handle their charactersbelievably. They also want a finale in which Good wins out over
Evil, which assures them that the formula "being alive is all right"
is the right formula.
The Case of Charles Dexter Ward is in every way a negation
of Blatty's Exorcist. In Lovecraft's novel, the universe cares
nothing for human life, just as it is in the real world, and one
does not care about the characters-they are only a perspective
from which to view the horror of the plot. This is acceptable to
very few readers. Good and Evil are rubrics of an existential 
204 
code long gone, just as they are in the real world. Again, this is
acceptable to very few readers. And the idea of human beings
as creatures with souls is not an issue in The Case of Charles
Dexter Ward because it was not an issue for Lovecraft. Everyone, not only the hapless protagonist of the book, exists in a
world that is a wall-to-wall nightmare. In Lovecraft's universe
without a fonnula, everyone is killable--and some kill themselves just ahead of the worse things waiting for them. Life as
we conceive it, let alone a configuration of atoms that goes by
the name Charles Dexter Ward, occurs in a context of permanent jeopardy which only remains to be discovered and from
which there is no salvation. Lovecraft does not want to take
you on an emotional roller-coaster ride, at the end of which he
tells you to watch your step as your car comes to a stop and
you settle back onto steady ground. He simply wants to say that
we no longer have to stand back very far to see that the human
race is what it always has been in this or any other worldirrelevant, which is as liberating to some as it is maddening to
others, including Lovecraft's characters.
Lovecraft's employment of supernatural possession as a storytelling device in The Case of Charles Dexter Ward is so alien
to Blatty's in The Exorcist that the two men might as well have
been living in different centuries, or even different millennia.
The narrative parameters of The Exorcist begin and end with
the New Testament; those of The Case of Charles Dexter Ward
could only have been conceived by a fiction writer of the modern era, a time when it had become safe not only to place humanity outside the center of the Creation but also to survey the
universe itself as centerless and our species as only a smudge of
organic materials at the mercy of forces that know us not, just
as we are in the real world.
As for the special fate of the protagonist of Lovecraft's
novel, his possession by his ancestor Joseph Curwen, a master of 
205
occult arts, is only a means to much larger ends that have been
eons in the making. As previously imaged, he is just a configuration of atoms, not an ensouled creature of a god who has been
toying with us for the past hundred thousand years more or less.
Absolutely up-to-date--that is, post-everything-The Case of
Charles Dexter Ward emerged from an imagination that was
deferential to no traditions or dogmas, and its author went the
distance of disillusionment in assuming the meaningless universe that became the starting point for later investigators in the
sciences and philosophy. (Ask the Nobel Prize-winning physicist Steven Weinberg, who notoriously said, "The more we
know about the universe, the more meaningless it appears.") Although Lovecraft did have his earthbound illusions, at the end of
the day he existed in a no man's land of disillusionment. As a
fiction writer, he will ever be a contemporary of each new generation of mortals, because there will always be many a character in the real world for whom human life is not acceptable.
Uncharacters
In many horror stories there is an assortment of figures that appear as walk-ons or extras whose purpose is to lend their spooky
presence to a narrative for atmosphere alone, while the real bogey is something else altogether. Puppets, dolls, and other caricatures of the human often make cameo appearances as shapes
sagging in the corner of a child's bedroom or lolling on the
shelves of a toy store. There are also dismembered limbs and decapitated heads of manikins that have been relegated to spare
parts strewn about an old warehouse where such things are
stored or sent to die. As backdrops or bit-players, imitations of
the human form have a symbolic value because they seem connected to another world, one that is all harm and disorder-the
kind of place we sometimes fear is the model for our own home
ground, which we must believe is passably sound and secure, or 
206 
at least not an environment where we might mistake a counterfeit person for the real thing. But in fiction, as in life, mistakes are
sometimes made. When they are, one of those humanoid replicas
may advance to the center of a story's action.
In E. T. A. Hoffmann's "The Sandman," for instance, the protagonist Nathanael discovers that the too perfect girl to whom he
has proposed marriage is really just an automaton. This shakes
him up so greatly that he is committed to an asylum until he recovers his senses. The incident with Nathanael's mechanical fiancee, a thing of parts who is the creation of two mysterious
characters in the story, also shakes up others who are in love
with dream girls. As Hoffmann's story goes, "Many lovers, to be
quite convinced that they were not enamored of wooden dolls,
would request their mistresses to sing and dance a little out of
time, to embroider and knit, and play with their lapdogs, while
listening to reading, etc., and, above all, not merely to listen, but
also sometimes to talk in such a manner as presupposed actual
thought and feeling." Toward the end of "The Sandman," Nathanael's madness returns, and he leaps to his death from a steeple after screaming "Tum and turn about, little doll."
There are many abominable fates in horror stories, and
among them is that of Nathanael. Worse still is when a human
being becomes objectified as a puppet, a doll, or some other
caricature of our species and enters a world that he or she
thought was just a creepy little place inside of ours. What a jolt
to find oneself a prisoner in this sinister sphere, reduced to a
composite mechanism looking out on the land of the human, or
one which we believe to be human by any definition of the
word, and to be exiled from it. Just as we know that dreams are
merely reflections of what happens in our lives, we are also
quite sure that puppets, dolls, and other caricatures of our species are only reflections of ourselves. In a sane world, no correspondence could exist between those artificial anatomies and 
 207
our natural flesh. That would be too strange and awful, for
things to become confused in such a way. More strange and awful, of course, would be to find this a living confusion-life as
the dream of a puppet.
Supernaturalism
When the narrator of Joseph Conrad's novel Under Western
Eyes (1911) writes that "the belief in a supernatural source of
evil is not necessary; men alone are quite capable of every
wickedness," he seems to be speaking for the author, who
shunned the supernatural in his fiction. Nevertheless, Conrad
was a great depicter of what he felt was an ineffable deviltry
that nests in the shadows of all that is. And any close reader of
Conrad will perceive the impure breath of the supernatural in
many of his works. In Heart of Darkness (1902), for example, he
pulls at the collar of psychological realism, plying his genius for
nuance and stealing up to the very border of supernaturalism.
By proceeding thus, Conrad impresses upon his audience the
consciousness of a horror that goes beyond the human and takes
in all of being.
Conrad's odyssey into horror begins when the narrator of
Heart of Darkness, Charles Marlow, acquires a position with a
European business concern as the skipper of a steamboat. His
first charge is to guide the vessel down a snaking African river to
a remote outpost run by one the company's best men, Mr. Kurtz,
a prolific supplier of goods to his employers. At every point,
Marlow feels his journey is taking him farther and farther into an
unholy land as he progresses toward his destination. Thus:
Going up that river was like traveling back to the earliest beginnings of the world, when vegetation rioted on the earth and the
big trees were kings. An empty stream, a great silence, an impenetrable forest. The air was warm, thick, heavy, sluggish. There was
no joy in the brilliance of sunshine. The long stretches of the wa-
208 
terway ran on, deserted, into the gloom of overshadowed distances. On silvery sandbanks hippos and alligators sunned themselves side by side. The broadening waters flowed through a mob
of wooded islands; you lost your way on that river as you would
in a desert, and butted all day long against shoals, trying to find the
channel, till you thought yourself bewitched and cut off for ever
from everything you had known once-somewhere-far awayin another existence perhaps. There were moments when one's
past came back to one, as it will sometimes when you have not a
moment to spare to yourself; but it came in the shape of an unrestful and noisy dream, remembered with wonder amongst the
overwhelming realities of this strange world of plants, and water,
and silence. And this stillness of life did not in the least resemble a
peace. It was the stillness of an implacable force brooding over an
inscrutable intention. It looked at you with a vengeful aspect. I got
used to it afterwards; I did not see it any more; I had no time. I
had to keep guessing at the channel; I had to discern, mostly by inspiration, the signs of hidden banks; I watched for sunken stones; I
was learning to clap my teeth smartly before my heart flew out,
when I shaved by a fluke some infernal sly old snag that would
have ripped the life out of the tin-pot steamboat and drowned all
the pilgrims; I had to keep a look-out for the signs of dead wood
we could cut up in the night for next day's steaming. When you
have to attend to things of that sort, to the mere incidents of the
surface, the reality-the reality, I tell you-fades. The inner truth
is hidden-luckily, luckily. But I felt it all the same; I felt often its
mysterious stillness watching me ....
This passage substantiates that you do not need the supernatural to invoke the supernatural. Reality fades more and more as
Marlow approaches Kurtz, who embodies the horrible "inner
truth" of things. On the level of narrative, this inner truth is
outwardly made plain by one look at Kurtz's base of operations,
where the barbarous means of his successful career are visible
· everywhere. But Kurtz is not just a bestial headman managing a
trading post in Africa. His whole meaning as a character is
much more than that. What the brutally atavistic Kurtz signifies to Marlow surpasses the "wickedness of men" and deposits 
 209
the steamboat captain on the threshold of an occult truth about
the underpinnings of the only reality he has ever known-the
anchoring fictions of civilization.
If Kurtz is simply a man who has realized his potential for
wickedness-which, by inference, is a potential for each of
us-then he is merely another candidate for incarceration or
the death penalty. But if he is a man who has probed the mysteries of something that is wicked in its essence, then he has
crossed the point of no return, and his last words-"The horror1
The horror1"-have prodigious implications. Not to say that the
assorted overtones that literary critics have heard in the storycivilization is only skin deep, European colonialism was a bad
business-are not horrors. But they are not the horror that
every incident of the narrative prefigures. In Heart of Darkness,
Conrad did not cede "the horror" a local habitation and a name
(example: The Creature from the Black Lagoon), but artfully
suggested a malignity conjoining the latent turpitude of human
beings with that active in being itself.
As a species, we might have been saved both from our turpitude, latent or not, and from any notion of turpitude active in
being itself. The real horror, the real tragedy, is that we were
not saved. In an 1 898 letter to the Scottish writer R. B. Cunninghame Graham, Conrad wrote:
Yes, egoism is good, and altruism is good, and fidelity to nature
would be the best of all ... if we could only get rid of consciousness. What makes mankind tragic is not that they are the victims
of nature, it is that they are conscious of it. To be part of the animal kingdom under the conditions of this earth is very well-but
as soon as you know of your slavery, the pain, the anger, the
strife-the tragedy begins. We can't return to nature, since we
can't change our place in it. Our refuge is in stupidity ... There is
no morality, no knowledge, and no hope; there is only the consciousness of ourselves which drives us about a world that ... is
always but a vain and floating appearance. (Conrad's emphasis) 
210 
Too conscious that Heart of Darkness was not the place for
such discourse, Conrad gave us Marlow's sensitivity to an "implacable force brooding over an inscrutable intention" and
Kurtz's resonant last words. If our species was not saved from
consciousness, at least the above letter was saved so that we
could know what horror was in Conrad's heart.
Some horror writers are not the least concerned with the wickedness of men but exclusively attend to an "implacable force
brooding over an inscrutable intention," which is to say, something pernicious behind the scenes of life that makes our lives a
living nightmare. For Lovecraft, this all-embracing nightmare
became the grounding for the supernaturalism of his writings,
most famously in his negative mythology of multidimensional
horrors sometimes collectively designated as the "Great Old
Ones," who came to earth from other worlds, much like the
Body Snatchers and the Thing. Their individual names alone,
some of which were referenced earlier in this book, convey
their otherworldly demonism. Here are some other names:
Dagon, Yog-Sothoth, and Shub-Niggurath the Goat with a
Thousand Young. Lovecraft also wrote of unnamed beings that
may be apprehended only by their sensory attributes, as with
the eponymous entity in "The Colour out of Space" or the unobserved source of the "exquisitely low and infinitely distant
musical note" that sounds in the blackness above the Rue
d'Auseil in "The Music of Erich Zann."
In composing the latter work, Lovecraft came up with a
model supernatural horror tale, one in which a subjective mind
and an objective monstrosity shade into each other, the one projecting itself outward and the other reflecting back so that together they form the perfect couple dancing to the uncanny
music of being. The mind in the story is that of the nervously afflicted narrator; the monstrosity is the unnamed and unnamable 
21 1
nemesis of the nervously afflicted Zann. With his viol-playing,
Zann battles to keep at bay this thing that would destroy an already tumble-down world as represented by the Rue d'Auseil,
the street on which he lives and where he dies. In ''The Music of
Erich Zann," Lovecraft offers no sanity or system of meaning.
What he does offer are Zann's "weird notes," which correspond
to powers of disorder that scoff at our fabricated world and show
us the horror of our lives.
Belief in the supernatural is only superstition. That said, a sense
of the supernatural, as Conrad evinced in Heart of Darkness,
must be admitted if one's inclination is to go the limits of horror. It is the sense of what should not be--the sense of being
ravaged by the impossible. Phenomenally speaking, the supernatural may be regarded as the metaphysical counterpart of insanity, a transcendental correlative of a mind that has been
driven mad. This mind does not keep a chronicle of "man's inhumanity to man" but instead tracks a dysphoria symptomatic
of our life as transients in a creation that is natural for all else
that lives, but for us is anything but.
The most uncanny of creaturely traits, the sense of the supernatural, the impression of a fatal estrangement from the
visible, is dependent on our consciousness, which merges the
outward and the inward into a universal comedy without
laughter. We are only chance visitants to this jungle of blind
mutations. The natural world existed when we did not, and it
will continue to exist long after we are gone. The supernatural
crept into life only when the door of consciousness was opened
in our heads. The moment we stepped through that door, we
walked out on nature. Say what we will about it and deny it till
we die-we are blighted by our knowing what is too much to
know and too secret to tell one another if we are to stride along
our streets, work at our jobs, and sleep in our beds. It is the 
212 
know ledge of a race of beings that is only passing through this
shoddy cosmos.2
As explained in an earlier section of this work, literary use of
the supernatural may strikingly differ among the works of diverse authors or even within the output of a single author. A
noteworthy example of the latter case displays itself in a comparison of two of Shakespeare's greatest plays, Hamlet (c. 1600-
1601) and Macbeth (c. 1606). In Hamlet, the supernatural element is extraneous; in Macbeth, it is integral. While both dramas are patterned along the lines of a soap opera-complete
with squabbles, schemes, betrayals, and deceptions in a world
on the make--Macbeth is played out within a supernatural order that is reinforced throughout the play and gives it a terrible
mystery that Hamlet lacks. The latter work does have its ghost,
but this apparition serves only as a dramatic device to get the
plot moving, which could have been done without an otherworldly intervention that gives away the work's central secret
from its commencement and in no sense tinctures the incidents
of the play with a tenebrous and malefic presence, as is the case
with Macbeth.
Without the three witches (a.k.a. Weird Sisters; Sisters of
Fate), who officiate as masters of a power that reduces the characters of the drama to the status of puppets, Macbeth would not
be Macbeth. Without the ghost of Hamlet, Sr., Hamlet would
still be Hamlet. As we all know, later in the drama Hamlet the
Younger doubts the words of his father's presumptive spirit and
double-checks them by having a troupe of actors stage a number
called The Murder of Gonzaga, so that the indecisive protagonist
can see for himself how the new king, his uncle Claudius, responds to the play's reenactment of how he killed his brother.
Hamlet needs earthly evidence, not just the words of a revenant,
to confirm the crime. The play's the thing, not the ghost. It is 
 213
just too much that after all the inside information thunderously
told by the Hamlet the Elder in the first act, Hamlet the
Younger would still feel the necessity to engage in his own detective work before making his move. Another set-up could
have been used to point the finger at Claudius's nefarious
deed-a snoop in the shrubbery perhaps-and the paternal
shade could have been edited from the play. Along with this excision there would be lost a side issue of interest to Shakespeare
scholars-to wit, the Bard's treatment of Catholicism's doctrine
of Purgatory-but nothing apposite to the story would have
gone missing. And the matter of whether or not the ghost is
truly that of Hamlet's father or a lying goblin is not kept so
much in the reader or playgoer's mind to be a source of great
suspense and would have derailed the course of Hamlets plot
had it turned out to be the latter. All told, Hamlet is not a work
that gains anything considerable from a supernatural intrusion.
In both Hamlet and Macbeth there is a mass of majestic
rhetoric by the title characters about the mysterious matters of
human life. However, there is a dimension of the unknowable
in Macbeth that situates us in a world of cosmic misrule outside
the boundaries of the natural order. Hamlet is a tragedy of human errors; Macbeth, an uncanny puppet show. The springboard of the earlier play is, once more, the treacherous murder
of Hamlet's father. That of the later piece is a malicious witchery in the world, an unbodied agency that tugs Macbeth
through motions that accurse him and his wife as much as they
do their victims. The play is a ferment of fatality. Every action
is choreographed by a supernaturalism that deracinates its main
characters from their natural drives to survive and reproduce
and leads Macbeth to the revelation, among others, that "Life's
but a walking shadow"-that death is the thing that makes us
uncanny things that have nothing to do with the rest of creation. Hamlet has bad dreams, as do we all. But Macbeth cannot 

dream. As contracted by fate, he has murdered sleep and knows
only a waking nightmare.
Plot
In his Idea of the Holy: An Inquiry into the Non-Rational Factor
in the Idea of the Divine and its Relation to the Rational (1917),
the German theologian Rudolf Otto writes of the "numinous,"
the wholly Other (that is, God), as a mysterium tremendum et
fascinans ("a terrifying and fascinating mystery") . Confrontations with the numinous are uncommon outside the lives of religious mystics, who may be terrified by their supernatural
assignations but are never undone by them. For these extremist
believers, the supernatural is a terror of the divine, not a demonic horror. And it is the absolute reality. After conjuring up
the wholly Other through prayer and meditation, cultists of the
sacred feel themselves to be nothing in its presence, only a bit
of crud stuck to the shoe of the numinous. Eventually, so says
Otto, they make common cause with the numinous and are
able to feel good about themselves. On Otto's say-so, these are
encounters with the supernatural in its truest and most encompassing sense; any others, including those evoked by supernatural horror stories, are primitive or perverted. What else could a
theologian say? What other kind of supernatural story would he
have to tell? While The Idea of the Holy has some electrifying
moments when things are touch and go, the ending is all blessedness and no harm done. But this is not what readers expect
when the supernatural is the featured element. They expect
death, good or not so good, and will feel swindled if they do not
get it. Because death is what really terrifies and fascinates them.
In the midst of their lives, they are deep in death ... and they
know it. They do not know the numinous, which hangs back
from life and welcomes very few into its circle. Why things
should be this way is the real mystery. 
 215
The context of Otto's tract is the nature and origins of religion, a
respectable fixation for scholars, divines, and anyone else who
has a few coins to throw in the pot. But paranormal researchers
have written with as much conviction, investigative rigor, and
personal experience about their own field of study; they, too,
have tales to tell of the terrifying and fascinating, as if anyone
could have a monopoly on these emotions or reserve their copyright for true believers only.3 The supernatural is in the public
domain, and, whatever the ontological angle, it is packaged with
plots that are missing from the natural world. When we and our
prototypes were part of that world, our lives had as little plot to
them as the doings of earth's flora and fauna. Later, as our consciousness began to inflate, we strayed off from the natural. Our
bodies stayed behind, but our minds searched for stories with
better plots than just survival, reproduction, and death. However, these stories could not be set in the natural world, where
there are no stories-where things just happen willy-nilly and
events have no meaning outside of material practicality. These
stories had to have plots at a distance from biology.
Say what we like, we do not believe ourselves to be just organisms. Ask any medical researcher in his home-sweet-home if
he thinks of himself and his wife and kids in the same way he
does the animals he left back in the lab. That we are critters is
only a scientific technicality. What we see in our mirrors are
human beings, and what we need in our diet is the sustenance
of stories telling us that we are more than the sum of our creaturely parts. And our supply of this provender comes from only
one source--our consciousness, which dramatizes survival as
storied conflicts between everyone and his brother and tricks
up procreation as legends of courtly love, bedroom farces, and
romantic fictions with or without laughs.
But such narratives are not really very far from nature, as
we can confirm for ourselves. Those recitals of physical or psy-
216 
chological strife among us: Are they really so removed from
survival in the natural kingdom? No, they are not. They are still
nature, red in tooth and claw. Masked by our consciousness and
its illusions to seem uniquely human, our war stories, success
stories, and other bio-dramas are not qualitatively different
from their analogues in the wilderness. This goes doubly for
romance yarns, those dolled-up variations on mating rituals as
seen in nature documentaries. They are not detached from the
procreative dog-and-pony show as observed by zoologists and
would be dramatically incomplete without a sexual union as
their chief motive. Properly considered, they are an ornate pornography, with oft-repeated plots having their climax in a release of tension between two parties and their falling action in
what cinematic pornographers term a "money shot," which in
conventional filmic products is replaced by a kiss or a marriage
by way of consummation.
As survivors and procreators, we unravel stories that at
their root are not dissimilar from the habitual behaviors seen in
nature. But as beings who know they will die we digress into
episodes and epics that are altogether dissociated from the
natural world. We may isolate this awareness, distract ourselves
from it, anchor our minds far from its shores, and sublimate it
as a motif in our sagas. Yet at no time and in no place are we
protected from being tapped on the shoulder and reminded,
"You're going to die, you know." However much we try to ignore it, our consciousness haunts us with this knowledge. Our
heads were baptized in the font of death; they are doused with
the horror of moribundity.
Death-do we really believe it is part of the order of our
lives? We say that we do. But when it becomes lucent to our
imagination, how natural does it feel? W. A. Mozart's attributed
last words are apropos here: "The taste of death is on my
tongue. I feel something which is not of this world" (quoted in 
217
Jacques Choron, Death and Modern Man, 1964) . Death is not
like survival and procreation. It is more like a visitation from a
foreign and enigmatic sphere, one to which we are connected
by our consciousness. No consciousness, no death. No death, no
stories with a beginning, middle, and an end. Animal stories of
survival and procreation have no comparable structure because
animals have no consciousness of death.
Obviously, not all fictional plots end in death, only those
which follow a character's life until it can be followed no more.
However, in the world of nonfiction where we are making a go
of it on our own, we know how far we will be followed. What
we can never know is How and When the following will end.
But suppose we did know How and When the ending would
take place? What then? How could we go on? Who could live
through a story whose ending he or she knew from page one-­
not in a general sense but as to the How and When of that ending, which may be a crucifixion and not an easeful cessation?
Only because we do not know How or When our life story will
finish can we keep going. We remain in suspense about these
details, making it possible for us to follow attentively the twists
and turns of our personal plot. And so the story holds our interest for as long as it lasts.
Yet everyone knows What is going to happen at the end.
We just do not know what it will be like when what is going to
happen actually happens. One would think that would be
enough to ruin the story, knowing What is going to happenthat no one is going to make it through. Somehow, though, it
does not. Our crafty minds have taken care of that. They have
thought a thousand different endings, most prominently that of
dying in one's sleep, or not thought about the ending at all. But
when it comes, it comes. Nothing will tum away that distinguished visitor. After being long refused admittance into our
lives, death materializes outside our door and begins pounding 
218 
to be let in. Now everything quivers with an aura of the uncanny, and nameless shapes begin to form. As the end nears,
consciousness surges and the pieces fall together. Being alive is
all right, or so most of us say. But when death walks through
the door, nothing is all right. As some believe that life is that
which should not be, the bulk of the rest of us believe the same
of death. That is its terror and its fascination. Everyone knows
that we are all the dead-to-be. There are gewgaws and knickknacks that stay in shape far longer than our mortal forms. If
we called ourselves dead from the time we are born, we would
not be far off from the truth. But as long as we can walk or
crawl or just lie abed sucking tubes, we can still say that being
alive is all right.
Without death-meaning without our consciousness of
death-no story of supernatural horror would ever have been
written, nor would any other artistic representation of human
life have been created for that matter. It is always there, if only
between the lines or brushstrokes, or conspicuously by its absence. It is a terrific stimulus to that which is at once one of our
greatest weapons and greatest weaknesses-imagination. Our
minds are always on the verge of exploding with thoughts and
images as we ceaselessly pound the pavement of our world.
Both our most exquisite cogitations and our worst cognitive
drivel announce our primal torment: We cannot linger in the
stillness of nature's vacuity. And so we have imagination to beguile us. A misbegotten hatchling of consciousness, a birth defect of our species, imagination is often revered as a sign of
vigor in our make-up. But it is really just a psychic overcompensation for our impotence as beings. Denied nature's exemption from creativity, we are indentured servants of the
imaginary until the hour of our death, when the final harassments of imagination will beset us. 
 219
Apart from vulgar mortality, supernatural literature also
centers on the death of sanity, identity, ideals, abilities, passions,
and hand-me-down conceptions about the universe and everything in it. Death is accepted in horror stories because a plot
that did not ignite its terrors-in a fictional world, that iswould be a narrative miscarriage. But in real life few of us hang
out in morgues and mausoleum chambers, and even those who
do are only perversely inuring themselves to the graphic details
of what puts us in these places. Being alive is supposed to be all
right, but not when you have no choice but to consider the alternative. An example of how this might happen, one with
which most of us are conversant, is the prosaic plot of a vehicular misadventure, a mischance that is ordinarily experienced as
a dreamlike ramble with unforeseen stops along the way.
Imagine: You may be traveling on a slippery road when,
without warning, your vehicle begins sliding across several lanes
of oncoming traffic. You know that such things happen. They
may even have happened to you on a prior occasion. You know
that they happen to other people all the time. Nevertheless,
this accident was not in your plans, which is why it is called an
accident. In principle, it could be plotted as a cause-and-effect
confluence of circumstances, although you would never be able
to trace them to their originating source, not even if you went
back to the beginning of time. It might occur to you, though,
that the responsibility for your accident-to-come lay with a
friend or relative who called and asked you to come over and
lend a hand in some fix-it project, because you would not even
be out of the house except for that untimely request. Yet you
would be just as right to hold other factors responsible: the
slippery road on which you were driving, the weather that
made the road slippery, all the things that determined the
weather, the length of time you spent looking in your clothes
closet for the shoes that would be most proper to wear for the 
220 
fix-it project in question-that interval of perfect extent which
made sure you would be just where you needed to be so that
you would not be too early or too late to become involved in a
vehicular misadventure.
But whatever the proximate or remote causes of your vehicular misadventure might have been, you had an idea of how
things were to happen that day, as you do every day, and spinning out of control in your car while other vehicles try to circumvent a collision with you was not on your schedule. One
second ago you had a firm grip on things, but now you are veering toward who knows where. You are not filled with horror,
not yet, as you careen along the pavement that is slick with rain
or snow glistening in the moonlight, the wind wailing and shadows scattering. At this point everything is all strangeness. You
have been taken to a different place from where you were just
a moment before.
Then it begins. This can 't be happening, you think-if you
can think at all, if you are anything more than a whirlwind of
panic. In reality, though, anything can happen now. This is the
whispering undercurrent that creeps into your thoughtsnothing is safe and nothing is off limits. All of a sudden something was set in motion that changed everything. Something descended upon you that had been circling above your life from
the day you were born. And for the first time you feel that
which you have never felt before--the imminence of your own
death. There is no possibility for self-deception now. The paradox that came with consciousness is done with. Only horror is
left. This is what is real. This is the only thing that was ever
real, however unreal it may have seemed. Of course, bad things
happen, as everyone knows. They have always happened and
always will happen. They are part of the natural order of things.
But this is not how we would have it. This is not how we think
things should be for us. This is how we think things should not 
 221
be. And all supernatural horror, as we remember, obtains in
what we believe should be and should not be.
Yet might we have avoided this horror by warding off our
belief in what should be and what should not be, by believing
only in what is? No, we could not. We were doomed to hold
this belief and to suffer what looms out of it. What doomed us
(if one will forgive another imperious repetition of this theme)
was consciousness-parent of all horrors and author of all we
believe should be and should not be. While consciousness
brought us out of our coma in the natural, we still like to think
that, however aloof we are from other living things, we are not
in essence wholly alienated from them. We do try to fit in with
the rest of creation, living and breeding like any other animal or
vegetable. It is no fault of ours that we were made as we were
made-experiments in a parallel being. This was not our
choice. We did not volunteer to be as we are. We may think
that being alive is all right, especially when we consider the alternative, but we think about it as infrequently as possible, for
this very thought raises the spirits of the dead and all the other
freaks of nature.
No other life forms know they are alive, and neither do they
know they will die. This is our curse alone. Without this hex
upon our heads, we would never have withdrawn as far as we
have from the natural-so far and for such a time that it is a relief to say what we have been trying with our all not to say: We
have long since been denizens of the natural world. Everywhere
around us are natural habitats, but within us is the shiver of startling and dreadful things. Simply put: We are not from here. If we
vanished tomorrow, no organism on this planet would miss us.
Nothing in nature needs us. We are like Mainlander's suicidal
God. Nothing needed Him either, and His uselessness was transferred to us after He burst out of existence. We have no business being in this world. We move among living things, all those 
222 
natural puppets with nothing in their heads. But our heads are in
another place, a world apart where all the puppets exist not in
the midst of life but outside it. We are those puppets, those
human puppets. We are crazed mimics of the natural prow ling
about for a peace that will never be ours. And the medium in
which we circulate is that of the supernatural, a dusky element
of horror that obtains for those who believe in what should be
and should not be. This is our secret quarter. This is where we
rave with insanity on the level of metaphysics, fracturing reality
and breaking the laws of life.
Deviations from the natural have whirled around us all our
days. We kept them at arm's length, abnormalities we denied
were elemental to our being. But absent us there is nothing of
the supernatural in the universe. We are aberrations-beings
born undead, neither one thing nor another, or two things at
once ... uncanny things that have nothing to do with the rest of
creation, horrors that poison the world by sowing our madness
everywhere we go, glutting daylight and darkness with incorporeal obscenities. From across an immeasurable divide, we
brought the supernatural into all that is manifest. Like a faint
haze it floats around us. We keep company with ghosts. Their
graves are marked in our minds, and they will never be disinterred from the cemeteries of our remembrance. Our heartbeats are numbered, our steps counted. Even as we survive and
reproduce, we know ourselves to be dying in a dark corner of
infinity. Wherever we go, we know not what expects our arrival but only that it is there.
With eyes that see through a translucent veil shimmering
before us, we look at life from the other side. There, something
escorts us through our days and nights like a second shadow
that casts itself into another world and fastens us to it. Leashed
to the supernatural, we know its signs and try to tame them by
desensitization and lampoonery. We study them as symbols, 
223
play games with them. Then an eerily hued light bathes them,
and they become real once more: the grinning skull, the curving
scythe, the moldy headstone, all the dark creatures of the earth
and air, all the momenti mori we have hidden within us. These
skeletons of ours-when will they come out and show themselves? They groan more loudly with each passing year. Time
breezes by with chilling haste. Is the child in that old photograph really an erstwhile version of you, your little hand waving
farewell? The face of that child is nothing like the face you
have now. That child's face is now melding with the blackness
behind you, before you, around you. The child is waving and
smiling and fading as your car keeps skidding toward your
abruptly curtailed future. Bye-bye.
Then another face appears. It has displaced the one you are
used to seeing when your rearview mirror goes crooked, as it
has now, and confronts you. You cannot look away, because the
other face is lit up like a full moon, which both terrifies and
fascinates you. And nothing about it looks natural. It seems
rigid-the face of something that belongs in a toy chest. The
face is smiling, but too much and too long to be real. And its
eyes do not blink. The scene shifts moment by moment. People, places, and things appear and disappear. You appeared as
others expected but not as you chose. You will disappear as if
you had never been, having taken your turn in this world. You
always told yourself that this was the natural way of things and
that you could submit to it because you belonged to nature ...
MALIGNANTLY USELESS nature, which coughed you up
like a little phlegm from its great lungs. Yet the supernatural
has cleaved to you from the beginning, working its oddities into
your life while you waited for death to begin beating on your
door. It has not come to save you, but to bring you into its horror. Perhaps you hoped to make it through this horror that sat
like a gargoyle upon your life. Now you find there is no way 
224 
through. Only seconds are left, each one strangling you a little
more tightly. Incantations are spoken all around. They have lost
their power. The living and the dead j abber inside you. You
cannot understand them. Dreams become more lustrous than
memories. Darkness is shoveled over dreams.
Those unblinking eyes are still gleaming in the mirror, the
eyes of that face, smiling too much and too long. And you can
feel your own face smiling, too, your eyes not blinking. Now
that secret you never wanted to know comes into your headthat you were made as you were made and manipulated to behave as you behaved. And as this secret comes into your head,
the smile of that face in the mirror pushes up at its edges. So
does yours, doing as it is bidden. Both faces at once are smiling
the same smile. It widens past all sane proportion. At last a
long-restrained voice cries out: What is this life! But only silence
answers, and it mocks every mad hope you ever held.
No self now, consciously speaking.
No feeling your old self or new self, false imaginings if you
think about it, self-conscious nothings everywhere you look.
No one to hear you weep or scream, making a go of it on your
own, bye-bye.
No bosom of nature, abandoned on the doorstep of the supernatural, minds full of flagrantly joyless possibilities, a real blunder that was, the human tragedy.
No reality to speak of, nobody here but us puppets, contradictory beings, mutants who embody the contorted logic of a paradox.
No immortality, ordinary folk and average mortals coming
and going, can't stay long, got an appointment with nonexistence,
no alternative to consider, being alive was all right while it lasted,
so they say.
No life story with a happy ending to tell, only a contrivance of
horror, then nothingness-and nothing else. 
 225
No Free Will-to-live, no redemption by a Will-to-die, how depressing.
No philosophies to peddle, pessimism a no-sale, optimism had
to close its doors, too wicked to pass code.
No meanings or mind-games, repressional mechanisms broke
down, self-deception shuttered its windows.
No awakening from a dream within a dream, mutation of
consciousness-parent of all horrors, best not mess with it, extinction looking better all the time.
No more pleasure, what there was of it, a Jew crumbs left by
chaos at feast, still a good supply of pain, though.
No praiseworthy incentives, just bowel-movement pressures,
potato-mashing relativism.
No euthanasia, bad for the business of life, you're on your
own there, but watch out for the eternal return, most horrible idea
in the universe.
No loving God, omnipotence off duty and omniscience on
leave, the deity He dead-the horror, the horror, even the skies of
spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison,
blame it on the piecing together of dissociated knowledge.
No compassionate Buddha, Body Snatchers got him, heard
tell, or some kind of thing, maybe next lifetime.
No Good-versus-Evil Jonnulas around here, Azathoth running
the show, human beings a mistake or a joke, something pernicious
making a nightmare of our world.
No being nonnal and real, the uncanny coming at you full
speed, startling and dreadful.
No ego-death-enlightenment by accident.
No way out of hann's way, better never to have been, worst
saved for last.
No Last Messiah, buried in the fingernails of midwives and
pacifier makers, gone the way of messiahs past.
No bleakness either, a failure indeed. 
226 
No terror management by isolation, anchoring, distraction,
sublimation.
No tragedies to read or to write, death kept at a safe distance
past the vanishing point down the road.
No escape routes into a useless bliss, useless existence, malignantly so ...
What now? Now there is only that unnaturally spreading
smile--a great gaping abyss where blackness reaches out to
blackness, nothing. Then: the sense of being swallowed. The
story is done; the plot complete.
Endgame
To contest Zapffe's philosophy, or any philosophy like it, would
be as facile as to contest that of any other philosopher whose
reasoning does not suit your predilections. If his analysis of human existence appears secure in a certain light, it may be
flouted with little exertion by anyone thus motivated. Zapffe
did not discover the New World, with a handful of dirt to
prove it. He was someone who thought he had worked out
why humankind should go extinct, knowing that we would
never make that choice, whatever he and his Last Messiah had
to say. Whether we are sovereign or enslaved in our being,
what of it? Our species will still look to the future and see no
need to abdicate its puppet dance of replication in a puppet
universe where the strings pull themselves. What a laugh that
we would do anything else, or could do anything else. That our
lives might be a paradox and a horror would not really be a secret too terrible to know for minds that know only what they
want to know. The hell of human consciousness is only a philosopher's bedtime story we can hear each night and forget each
morning when we awake to go to school or to work or wherever we may go day after day after day. What do we care about 
 227
the horror of being insufferably aware we are alive and will die
. . . the horror of shadows without selves enshrouding the earth
... or the horror of puppet-heads bobbing in the wind and disappearing into a dark sky like lost balloons? If that is the way
you think things are, go shout it from the rooftops and see
where it gets you. We are staying put, but you can go extinct if
you like. We can make more little puppets like you, but we do
not call them that. We call them people who have indivisible
selves and stories that are nothing like yours.
Being somebody is rough, but being nobody is out of the
question. We must be happy, we must imagine Sisyphus to be
happy, we must believe because it is absurd to believe. Day by
day, in every way, we are getting better and better. Positive illusions for positive persons. They shoot horses, don't they? But as
for shooting ourselves-ask Gloria Beatty, ask Michelstaedter,
ask Weininger, ask Hemingway. But do not ask Mainlander or
Bj0rneboe, who hanged themselves. And do not ask Jean
Amery, author of Suicide: A Discourse on Voluntary Death
(1976), who made his exit with a drug overdose. Amery survived Auschwitz, but he did not survive his survival. No one
does. With our progenitors and the world behind us, we will
never hold this life to be MALIGNANTLY USELESS. Almost
nobody declares that an ancestral curse contaminates us in
utero and pollutes our existence. Doctors do not weep in the
delivery room, or not often. They do not lower their heads and
say, "The stopwatch has started." The infant may cry, if things
went right. But time will dry its eyes; time will take care of it.
Time will take care of everyone until there are none of us to
take care of. Then all will be as it was before we put down
roots where we do not belong.
There will come a day for each of us-and then for all of usw hen the future will be done with. Until then, humanity will 

acclimate itself to every new horror that comes knocking, as it
has done from the very beginning. It will go on and on until it
stops. And the horror will go on, with generations falling into
the future like so many bodies into open graves. The horror
handed down to us will be handed down to others like a scandalous heirloom. Being alive: decades of waking up on time,
then trudging through another round of moods, sensations,
thoughts, cravings-the complete gamut of agitations-and finally flopping into bed to sweat in the pitch of dead sleep or
simmer in the phantasmagorias that molest our dreaming
minds. Why do so many of us bargain for a life sentence over
the end of a rope or the muzzle of a gun? Do we not deserve to
die? But we are not obsessed by such questions. To ask them is
not in our interest, nor to answer them with hand on heart. In
such spirit might we not bring to an end the conspiracy against
the human race? This would seem to be the right course: the
death of tragedy in the arms of nonexistence. Overpopulated
worlds of the unborn would not have to suffer for our undoing
what we have done so that we might go on as we have all these
years. That said, nothing we know would have us take that
step. What could be more unthinkable? We are only human
beings. Ask anybody. 

## SECOND BOOK: TROUBLE WITH BEING BORN

Three in the morning, I realize this second, then this one, then the next: I
draw up the balance sheet for each minute. And why all this? Because I was
born. It is a special type of sleeplessness that produces the indictment of
birth.
“Ever since I was born”—that since has a resonance so dreadful to my ears
it becomes unendurable.
There is a kind of knowledge that strips whatever you do of weight and
scope: for such knowledge, everything is without basis except itself. Pure to
the point of abhorring even the notion of an object, it translates that extreme
science according to which doing or not doing something comes down to
the same thing and is accompanied by an equally extreme satisfaction: that
of being able to rehearse, each time, the discovery that any gesture
performed is not worth defending, that nothing is enhanced by the merest
vestige of substance, that “reality” falls within the province of lunacy. Such
knowledge deserves to be called posthumous: it functions as if the knower
were alive and not alive, a being and the memory of a being. “It’s already in
the past,” he says about all he achieves, even as he achieves it, thereby
forever destitute of the present
Unmaking, decreating, is the only task man may take upon himself, if he
aspires, as everything suggests, to distinguish himself from the Creator.
I know that my birth is fortuitous, a laughable accident, and yet, as soon as I
forget myself, I behave as if it were a capital event, indispensable to the
progress and equilibrium of the world.
To have committed every crime but that of being a father.
As a general rule, men expect disappointment: they know they must not be
impatient, that it will come sooner or later, that it will hold off long enough
for them to proceed with their undertakings of the moment. The disabused
man is different: for him, disappointment occurs at the same time as the
deed; he has no need to await it, it is present. By freeing himself from
succession, he has devoured the possible and rendered the future
superfluous. “I cannot meet you in your future,” he says to the others. “We
do not have a single moment in common.” Because for him the whole of the
future is already here.
When we perceive the end in the beginning, we move faster than time.
Illumination, that lightning disappointment, affords a certitude which
transforms disillusion into deliverance.
I disentangle myself from appearances, yet I am snarled in them
nonetheless; or rather: I am halfway between these appearances and that
which invalidates them, that which has neither name nor content, that
which is nothing and everything. I shall never take the decisive step outside
them; my nature forces me to drift, to remain forever in the equivocal, and
if I were to attempt a clean break in one direction or the other, I should
perish by my salvation.
My faculty for disappointment surpasses understanding. It is what lets me
comprehend Buddha, but also what keeps me from following him.
What we can no longer commiserate with counts for nothing—no longer
exists. We realize why our past so quickly stops being “ours” and turns into
history, something which no longer concerns anyone.
In the deepest part of yourself, aspire to be as dispossessed, as lamentable
as God.
True contact between beings is established only by mute presence, by
apparent non-communication, by that mysterious and wordless exchange
which resembles inward prayer.
What I know at sixty, I knew as well at twenty. Forty years of a long, a
superfluous, labor of verification.
I am for the most part so convinced that everything is lacking in basis,
consequence, justification, that if someone dared to contradict me, even the
man I most admire, he would seem to me a charlatan or a fool
Even in childhood I watched the hours flow, independent of any reference,
any action, any event, the disjunction of time from what was not itself, its
autonomous existence, its special status, its empire, its tyranny. I remember
quite clearly that afternoon when, for the first time, confronting the empty
universe, I was no more than a passage of moments reluctant to go on
playing their proper parts. Time was coming unstuck from being—at my
expense.
Unlike Job, I have not cursed the day I was born; all the other days, on the
contrary, I have covered with my anathemas….
If death had only negative aspects, dying would be an unmanageable action.
Everything exists; nothing exists. Either formula affords a like serenity. The
man of anxiety, to his misfortune, remains between them, trembling and
perplexed, forever at the mercy of a nuance, incapable of gaining a foothold
in the security of being or in the absence of being.
Here on the coast of Normandy, at this hour of the morning, I needed no
one. The very gulls’ presence bothered me: I drove them off with stones.
And hearing their supernatural shrieks, I realized that that was just what I
wanted, that only the Sinister could soothe me, and that it was for such a
confrontation that I had got up before dawn.
“In this our life”—to be in life: suddenly I am struck by the strangeness of
such an expression, as if it applied to no one.
Whenever I flag and feel sorry for my brain, I am carried away by an
irresistible desire to proclaim. That is the moment I realize the paltry depths
out of which rise reformers, prophets, and saviors.
I long to be free—desperately free. Free as the stillborn are free.
If there is so much discomfort and ambiguity in lucidity, it is because
lucidity is the result of the poor use to which we have put our sleepless
nights.
Our obsession with birth, by shifting us to a point before our past, robs us of
our pleasure in the future, in the present, and even in the past.
Rare are the days when, projected into post-history, I fail to witness the
gods’ hilarity at leaving behind the human episode.
What we need is an alternate vision, when that of the Last Judgment no
longer satisfies anyone.
An idea, a being, anything which becomes incarnate loses identity, turns
grotesque. Frustration of all achievement. Never quit the possible, wallow
in eternal trifling, forget to be born.
The real, the unique misfortune: to see the light of day. A disaster which
dates back to aggressiveness, to the seed of expansion and rage within
origins, to the tendency to the worst which first shook them up.
When we see someone again after many years, we should sit down facing
each other and say nothing for hours, so that by means of silence our
consternation can relish itself.
Days of miraculous sterility. Instead of rejoicing over them, proclaiming
victory, transforming this drought into a celebration, seeing it as an
illustration of my fulfillment, my maturity, in short my detachment, I let
myself be invaded by spite and resentment: so tenacious is the old Adam in
us, the bustling canaille, unfit for self-effacement.
I am enraptured by Hindu philosophy, whose essential endeavor is to
surmount the self; and everything I do, everything I think is only myself
and the selfs humiliations.
While we are performing an action, we have a goal; performed, the action
has no more reality for us than the goal we were seeking. Nothing of much
consequence here—no more than a game. But some of us are conscious of
this game in the course of the action: we experience the conclusion in the
premises, the achieved in the virtual—we undermine “seriousness” by the
very fact that we exist.
The vision of non-reality, of universal default, is the product of an
everyday sensation and a sudden frisson. Everything is a game—without
such a revelation, the sensation we haul through our usual lives would not
have that characteristic stamp our metaphysical experiences require to be
distinguished from their imitations, our discomforts. For every discomfort is
only an abortive metaphysical experience.
When we have worn out the interest we once took in death, when we realize
we have nothing more to gain from it, we fall back on birth, we turn to a
much more inexhaustible abyss.
At this very moment, I am suffering—as we say in French, j’ai mal. This
event, crucial for me, is nonexistent, even inconceivable for anyone else, for
everyone else. Except for God, if that word can have a meaning.
would grow, develop, gather force. Hence we see why, by taking, a contrary
trajectory, they lack spirit and are so weary, when at last they come up
against their initial frontier, that they no longer have the energy to look
beyond, toward the “never-born.”
It is not my beginnings, it is the beginning that matters to me. If I bump into
my birth, into a minor obsession, it is because I cannot grapple with the first
moment of time. Every individual discomfort leads back, ultimately, to a
cosmogonie discomfort, each of our sensations expiating that crime of the
primordial sensation, by which Being crept out of somewhere….
Though we may prefer ourselves to the universe, we nonetheless loathe
ourselves much more than we suspect. If the wise man is so rare a
phenomenon, it is because he seems unshaken by the aversion which, like
all beings, he must feel for himself.
No difference between being and non-being, if we apprehend them with the
same intensity.
Nescience is the basis of everything, it creates everything by an action
repeated every moment, it produces this and any world, since it continually
takes for real what in fact is not. Nescience is the tremendous mistake that
serves as the basis of all our truths, it is older and more powerful than all
the gods combined.
This is how we recognize the man who has tendencies toward an inner
quest: he will set failure above any success, he will even seek it out,
unconsciously of course. This is because failure, always essential, reveals
us to ourselves, permits us to see ourselves as God sees us, whereas success
distances us from what is most inward in ourselves and indeed in
everything.
There was a time when time did not yet exist…. The rejection of birth is
nothing but the nostalgia for this time before time.
I think of so many friends who are no more, and I pity them. Yet they are
not so much to be pitied, for they have solved every problem, beginning
with the problem of death.
In the fact of being born there is such an absence of necessity that when you
think about it a little more than usual, you are left—ignorant how to react—
with a foolish grin.
Two kinds of mind: daylight and nocturnal. They have neither the same
method nor the same morality. In broad daylight, you watch yourself; in the
dark, you speak out. The salutary or awkward consequences of what he
thinks matter little to the man who questions himself at hours when others
are the prey of sleep. Hence he meditates upon the bad luck of being born
without concern for the harm he can cause others or himself. After midnight
begins the intoxication of pernicious truths.
As the years accumulate, we form an increasingly somber image of the
future. Is this only to console ourselves for being excluded from it? Yes in
appearance, no in fact, for the future has always been hideous, man being
able to remedy his evils only by aggravating them, so that in each epoch
existence is much more tolerable before the solution is found to the
difficulties of the moment.
In major perplexities, try to live as if history were done with and to react
like a monster riddled by serenity.
If I used to ask myself, over a coffin: “What good did it do the occupant to
be born?,” I now put the same question about anyone alive.
The emphasis on birth is no more than the craving for the insoluble carried
to the point of insanity.
Regarding death, I ceaselessly waver between “mystery” and
“inconsequentiality”—between the Pyramids and the Morgue.
It is impossible to feel that there was a time when we did not exist. Hence
our attachment to the personage we were before being born.
“Meditate but one hour upon the selfs nonexistence and you will feel
yourself to be another man.” said a priest of the Japanese Kusha sea to a
Western visitor.
Without having frequented the Buddhist monasteries, how many times
have I not lingered over- the world’s unreality, and hence my own? I have
not become another man for that, no, but there certainly has remained with
me the feeling that my identity is entirely illusory, and that by losing it I
have lost nothing, except something, except everything.
Instead of clinging to the fact of being born, as good sense bids, I take the
risk, I turn back, I retrogress increasingly toward some unknown beginning,
I move from origin to origin. Some day, perhaps, I shall manage to reach
origin itself, in order to rest there, or be wrecked.
X insults me. I am about to hit him. Thinking it over, I refrain.
Who am I? which is my real self: the self of the retort or that of the
refraining? My first reaction is always energetic; the second one, flabby.
What is known as “wisdom” is ultimately only a perpetual “thinking it
over,” i.e., non-action as first impulse.
If attachment is an evil, we must look for its cause in the scandal of birth,
for to be born is to be attached. Detachment then should apply itself to
getting rid of the traces of this scandal, the most serious and intolerable of
all.
Amid anxiety and distress, sudden calm at the thought of the foetus one has
been.
At this precise moment, no reproach proceeding from men or gods can
affect me: I have as good a conscience as if I had never existed.
It is a mistake to believe in a direct relation between suffering reverses and
being dead set against birth. Such opposition has deeper, more distant roots,
and would occur even if one had only the shadow of a grievance against
existence. In fact it is never more virulent than in cases of extreme good
fortune.
Thracians and Bogomils—I cannot forget that I have haunted the same
whereabouts as they, nor that the former wept over the newborn and the
latter, in order to justify God, held Satan responsible for the infamy of
Creation.
During the long nights in the caves, how many Hamlets must have
murmured their endless monologues—for it is likely that the apogee of
metaphysical torment is to be located well before that universal insipidity
which followed the advent of Philosophy.
The obsession with birth proceeds from an exacerbation of memory, from
an omnipresence of the past, as well as from a craving for the impasse, for
the first impasse. —No openness, hence no joy from the past but solely
from the present, and from a future emancipated from time.
For years, in fact for life, to have meditated only on your last moments,
only to discover, when at last you approach them, that it was of no use, that
the thought of death helps in everything save in dying!
It is our discomforts which provoke, which create consciousness; their task
accomplished, they weaken and disappear one after the other.
Consciousness however remains and survives them, without recalling what
it owes to them, without even ever having known. Hence it continually
proclaims its autonomy, its sovereignty, even when it loathes itself and
would do away with itself.
According to the Rule of Saint Benedict, if a monk became proud of or
merely satisfied with the task he was performing, he was to forsake it then
and there.
One danger not dreaded by the man who has lived in the thirst for
unsatisfaction, in an orgy of remorse and disgust.
If it is true that God dislikes taking sides, I should feel no awkwardness in
His presence, so pleased would I be to imitate Him, to be like Him, in
everything, “without opinion.”
To get up in the morning, wash and then wait for some unforeseen variety
of dread or depression.
I would give the whole universe and all of Shakespeare for a grain of
ataraxy.
Nietzsche’s great luck—to have ended as he did: in euphoria!
Endlessly to refer to a world where nothing yet stooped to occurrence,
where you anticipated consciousness without desiring it, where, wallowing
in the virtual, you rejoiced in the null plenitude of a self anterior to
selfhood….
Not to have been born, merely musing on that—what happiness, what
freedom, what space!
2
If disgust for the world conferred sanctity of itself, I fail to see how I could
avoid canonization.
No one has lived so close to his skeleton as I have lived to mine: from
which results an endless dialogue and certain truths which I manage neither
to accept nor to reject.
It is easier to get on with vices than with virtues. The vices, accommodating
by nature, help each other, are full of mutual indulgence, whereas the
jealous virtues combat and annihilate each other, showing in everything
their incompatibility and their intolerance.
It is trifling to believe in what you do or in what others do. You should
avoid simulacra and even “realities;” you should take up a position external
to everything and everyone, drive off or grind down your appetites, live,
according to a Hindu adage, with as few desires as a “solitary elephant.”
I forgive X everything because of his obsolete smile.
Not one moment when I have not been conscious of being outside Paradise.
Only what you hide is profound, is true. Whence the power of base feelings.
Ama nesari, says the Imitation of Christ. Love to be unknown. We are
happy with ourselves and with the world only when we conform to this
precept.
The intrinsic value of a book does not depend on the importance of its
subject (else the theologians would prevail, and mightily), but on the
manner of approaching the accidental and the insignificant, of mastering the
infinitesimal. The essential has never required the least talent.
The feeling of being ten thousand years behind, or ahead, of the others, of
belonging to the beginnings or to the end of humanity …
Negation never proceeds from reasoning but from something much more
obscure and old. Arguments come afterward, to justify and sustain it. Every
no rises out of the blood.
With the help of the erosion of memory, to recall the first initiatives of
matter and the risk of life which followed from them …
Each time I fail to think about death, I have the impression of cheating, of
deceiving someone in me.
There are nights that the most ingenious torturers could not have invented.
We emerge from them in pieces, stupid, dazed, with neither memories nor
anticipations, and without even knowing who we are. And it is then that the
day seems useless, light pernicious, even more oppressive than the
darkness.
A conscious fruit fly would have to confront exactly the same difficulties,
the same kind of insoluble problems as man.
Better to be an animal than a man, an insect than an animal, a plant than an
insect, and so on.
Salvation? Whatever diminishes the kingdom of consciousness and
compromises its supremacy.
I have all the defects of other people and yet everything they do seems to
me inconceivable.
Considering things according to nature, man was made to live facing
outward. If he would see into himself, he must close his eyes, renounce his
endeavors, quit the immediate. What is called “inner life” is a belated
phenomenon, possible only by a slowing down of our vital activities, “the
soul” being able to emerge and elaborate itself only at the expense of the
good behavior of our organs.
The merest atmospheric variation jeopardizes my plans, not to speak of my
convictions. This kind of dependency—the most humiliating kind—
unfailingly lays me low, even as it dissipates what few illusions remain as
to my possibilities of being free and as to freedom itself. What is the use of
swaggering if you are at the mercy of Wet and Dry? One craves a less
lamentable bondage, and gods of another kidney.
It’s not worth the bother of killing yourself, since you always kill yourself
too late.
When you know quite absolutely that everything is unreal, you then cannot
see why you should take the trouble to prove it.
As it leaves dawn behind and advances into the day, light prostitutes itself
and is redeemed—ethics of twilight—only at the moment it vanishes.
In Buddhist writings, mention is often made of “the abyss of birth.” An
abyss indeed, a gulf into which we do not fall but from which, instead, we
emerge, to our universal chagrin.
At increasingly wider intervals, impulses of gratitude toward Job and
Chamfort—toward vociferation and vitriol …
Each opinion, each view is necessarily partial, truncated, inadequate. In
philosophy and in anything, originality comes down to incomplete
definitions.
If we consider closely our so-called generous actions, there is none which,
from some aspect, is not blameworthy and even harmful, so that we come to
regret having performed it—so that we must choose, finally, between
abstention and remorse.
Explosive force of any mortification. Every vanquished desire affords us
power. We have the more hold over this world the further we withdraw
from it, the less we adhere to it. Renunciation confers an infinite power.
My disappointments, instead of converging toward a center and constituting
if not a system at least an ensemble, are scattered, each supposing itself
unique and thereby wasted, lacking organization.
The only successful philosophies and religions are the ones that flatter us,
whether in the name of progress or of hell Damned or not, man experiences
an absolute need to be at the heart of everything. It is, in fact, solely for this
reason that he is man, that he has become man. And if some day he no
longer feels this need, he must give way to some other animal prouder,
madder than himself.
He detested objective truths, the burden of argument, sustained reasoning.
He disliked demonstrating, he wanted to convince no one. Others are a
dialectician’s invention.
The more injured you are by time, the more you seek to escape it. To write a
faultless page, or only a sentence, raises you above becoming and its
corruptions. You transcend death by the pursuit of the indestructible in
speech, in the very symbol of nullity.
At the climax of a failure, at the moment when shame is about to do us in,
suddenly we are swept away by a frenzy of pride which lasts only long
enough to drain us, to leave us without energy, to lower, with our powers,
the intensity of our shame.
If death is as horrible as is claimed, how is it that after the passage of a
certain period of time we consider happy any being, friend or enemy, who
has ceased to live?
More than once, I have managed to leave my room, for if I had stayed there
I could not be sure of being able to resist some sudden resolution. The street
is more reassuring, you think less about yourself there, there everything
weakens and wilts, beginning with your own confusion.
Characteristic of sickness to stay awake when everything sleeps, when
everything is at rest, even the sick man.
When we are young, we take a certain pleasure in our infirmities. They
seem so new, so rich! With age, they no longer surprise us, we know them
too well. Now, without anything unexpected in them, they do not deserve to
be endured.
Once we appeal to our most intimate selves, once we begin to labor and to
produce, we lay claim to gifts, we become unconscious of our own gaps.
No one is in a position to admit that what comes out of his own depths
might be worthless. “Self-knowledge”? A contradiction in terms.
All these poems where it is merely the Poem that is in question—a whole
poetry with no other substance than itself! What would we say of a prayer
whose object was religion?
The mind that puts everything in question reaches, after a thousand
interrogations, an almost total inertia, a situation which the inert, in fact,
knows from the start, by instinct. For what is inertia but a congenital
perplexity?
What a disappointment that Epicurus, the sage I most need, should have
written over three hundred treatises! And what a relief that they are lost!
“What do you do from morning to night?” “I endure myself.”
A remark of my brother’s apropos of the troubles and pains our mother
endured: “Old age is nature’s self-criticism.”
“One must be mad or drunk,” the Abbe Sieyès said, to speak well in the
known languages. One must be drunk or mad, I should add, to dare, still, to
use words, any word….
The fanatic of elliptical gloom is sure to excel in any career save that of
being a writer.
Having always lived in fear of being surprised by the worst, I have tried in
every circumstance to get a head start, flinging myself into misfortune long
before it occurred.
We do not envy those who have the capacity to pray, whereas we are filled
with envy of the possessors of goods, of those who know wealth and fame.
Strange that we resign ourselves to someone’s salvation and not to what
fugitive advantages he may enjoy.
I never met one Interesting mind that was not richly endowed with
inadmissible deficiencies.
No true art without a strong dose of banality. The constant employment of
the unaccustomed readily wearies us, nothing being more unendurable than
the uniformity of the exceptional.
The trouble with using a borrowed language is that you have no right to
make too many mistakes in it. Now, it is by seeking a certain incorrectness
without however abusing it, it is by continually approaching solecism, that
writing may be given the appearance of life.
Each of us believes, quite unconsciously of course, that he alone pursues
the truth, which the rest are incapable of seeking out and unworthy of
attaining. This madness is so deep-rooted and so useful that it is impossible
to realize what would become of each of us if it were someday to disappear.
The first thinker was, without a doubt, the first man obsessed by why. An
unaccustomed mania, not at all contagious: rare indeed are those who suffer
from it, who are a prey to questioning, and who can accept no given
because they were born in consternation.
To be objective is to treat others as you treat an object, a corpse—to behave
with them like an undertaker.
This very second has vanished forever, lost in the anonymous mass of the
irrevocable. It will never return. I suffer from this, and I do not. Everything
is unique—and insignificant.
Emily Brontë: everything that comes from her has the capacity to
overwhelm me. Haworth is my Mecca.
To walk along a stream, to pass, to flow with the water, without effort,
without haste, while death continues in us its ruminations, its uninterrupted
soliloquy …
Only God has the privilege of abandoning us. Men can only drop us.
Without the faculty of forgetting, our past would weigh so heavily on our
present that we should not have the strength to confront another moment,
still less to live through it. Life would be bearable only to frivolous natures,
those in fact who do not remember.
Plotinus, Porphyry tells us, had the gift of reading men’s souls. One day,
without any warning, he told his astounded disciple not to try killing
himself but rather to take a journey. Porphyry left for Sicily: there he was
cured of his melancholy but, he adds regretfully, he thereby missed being
present at his master’s death, which occurred during his absence.
It has been a long time since philosophers have read men’s souls. It is not
their task, we are told. Perhaps. But we must not be surprised if they no
longer matter much to us.
A work exists only if it is elaborated in the darkness with attention, with all
the care of the murderer plotting his crime. In both cases, what counts is the
will to strike.
Self-knowledge—the bitterest knowledge of all and also the kind we
cultivate least: what is the use of catching ourselves out, morning to night,
in the act of illusion, pitilessly tracing each act back to its root, and losing
case after case before our own tribunal?
Each time I have a lapse of memory, I think of the anguish which must
afflict those who know they no longer remember anything. But something
tells me that after a certain time a secret joy possesses them, a joy they
would not agree to trade for any of their memories, even the most
stirring….
To claim you are more detached, more alien to everything than anyone, and
to be merely a fanatic of indifference!
The more you are a victim of contradictory impulses, the less you know
which to yield to. To lack character—precisely that and nothing but.
Pure time, time decanted, freed of events, beings, and things, appears only
at certain moments of the night, when you feel it coming on, with the one
intention of sweeping you off toward an exemplary catastrophe.
3
Suddenly feeling that you know as much as God about anything and
everything and quite as suddenly seeing this sensation vanish …
Firsthand thinkers meditate upon things; the others upon problems. We
must live face to face with being, and not with the mind.
“What are you waiting for in order to give up?” —Each sickness sends us a
summons disguised as a question. We play deaf, even as we realize that the
game is played out and that next time we must have the courage, at last, to
capitulate.
The older I grow, the less I react to frenzy, delirium. My taste, among
thinkers, now goes only to extinct volcanoes.
As a young man, I bored myself to death, but I believed in myself. If I had
no suspicion of the dreary creature I was to become, I knew nonetheless
that, whatever happened, Perplexity would not desert me, that it would keep
watch over my years with all the zeal and exactitude of Providence.
If we could see ourselves as others see us, we would vanish on the spot.
I once remarked to an Italian friend that the Latin peoples are without
secrecy—too open, too garrulous—and that I preferred nations ravaged by
timidity, adding that a writer who has failed to know it in his life is
worthless in his writings. “You’re right,” he answered. “When we describe
our experiences in our books, there is a lack of intensity, and of extension,
for we have already told them a hundred times before.” Whereupon we
talked about the literature of femininity, of its absence of mystery in
countries where the salon and the confessional prevail.
We should never deprive ourselves, I forget who once remarked, of the
“pleasures of piety.” Has religion ever been justified more delicately?
This craving to revise our enthusiasms, to change idols, to pray elsewhere
…
To stretch out in a field, to smell the earth and tell yourself it is the end as
well as the hope of our dejections, that it would be futile to search for
anything better to fest on, to dissolve into. …
When I happen to be busy, I never give a moment’s thought to the
“meaning” of anything, particularly of whatever it is I am doing. A proof
that the secret of everything is in action and not in abstention, that fatal
cause of consciousness.
What will be the physiognomy of painting, of poetry, of music, in a hundred
years? No one can tell. As after the fall of Athens, of Rome, a long pause
will intervene, caused by the exhaustion of the means of expression, as well
as by the exhaustion of consciousness itself. Humanity, to rejoin the past,
must invent a second naïveté, without which the arts can never begin again.
In one of the chapels of this ideally ugly church, we find the Virgin standing
with her Son above the globe: an aggressive sect which has undermined and
conquered an empire and inherited its flaws, beginning with gigantism.
It is written in the Zohar: “When man appeared, thereupon appeared the
flowers.” I suspect they were there long before him, and that his advent
plunged them all into a stupefaction from which they have not yet
recovered.
Impossible to read a line by Kleist without thinking that he committed
suicide: as if his suicide had preceded his works.
In the Orient, the oddest, the most idiosyncratic Western thinkers would
never have been taken seriously, on account of their contradictions. This is
precisely why we are interested in them. We prefer not a mind but the
reversals, the biography of a mind, the incompatibilities and aberrations to
be found there, in short those thinkers who, unable to conform to the rest of
humanity and still less to themselves, cheat as much by whim as by fatality.
Their distinctive sign? A touch of fakery in the tragic, a hint of dalliance
even in the irremediable.
If, in her Foundations, Teresa of Avila lingers over the subject of
melancholia, it is because she recognizes it as incurable. Physicians, she
says, cannot deal with it, and the mother superior of a convent, faced with
such sufferers, has but one recourse: to inspire them with the dread of
authority, to threaten them, to frighten them. The saint’s method remains the
best: only kicks, slaps, and a good beating will be effective in the case of a
“depressive.” Moreover, such treatment is precisely what the “depressive”
himself resorts to when he decides to end it all: he merely employs more
thorough means.
In relation to any act of life, the mind acts as a killjoy.
Easy to imagine the elements, bored with their exhausted theme, disgusted
by their invariable and utterly predictable combinations, seeking some
diversion: life would be merely a digression, merely an anecdote….
Anything that can be done seems to me pernicious and at best futile. If need
be I can rouse myself but not act. I understand all too well Wordsworth’s
description of Coleridge: eternal activity without action.
Whenever something still seems possible, I have the sense I have been
bewitched.
The one sincere confession is the one we make indirectly—when we talk
about other people.
We do not adopt a belief because it is true (they are all true), but because
some obscure power impels us to do so. When this power leaves us, we
suffer prostration and collapse, a tête-à-tête with what is left of ourselves.
“The quality of every perfect form is to release the mind immediately,
whereas the corrupt form holds the mind prisoner, like a bad mirror which
tells us of nothing but itself.” In Kleist’s praise—and how un-German it
sounds—of limpidity, his target was not philosophy in particular. Yet his is
the best possible critique of philosophical jargon, a pseudo-language which,
attempting to reflect ideas, merely assumes a contour at their expense,
merely denatures and darkens them, merely calls attention to itself. By one
of the most troublesome of all usurpations, the word has taken the leading
role in a realm where it should be imperceptible.
“O Satan, my Master, I give myself unto thee forever!” How I regret not
remembering the name of the nun who, having written these words with a
nail dipped in her own blood, deserves to figure in an anthology of prayer
and concision.
Consciousness is much more than the thorn, it is the dagger in the flesh.
Ferocity occurs in all conditions save in joy. Schadenfreude, malicious joy,
is a misrepresentation. To do evil is a pleasure, not a joy. Joy, the one true
victory over the world, is pure in its essence, hence irreducible to pleasure,
which is always suspect, both in itself and in its manifestations.
An existence constantly transfigured by failure.
The wise man consents to everything, for he identifies himself with nothing.
An opportunist without desires.
Nature’s great mistake was to have been unable to confine herself to one
“kingdom”: juxtaposed with the vegetable, everything else seems
inopportune, out of place. The sun should have sulked at the appearance of
the first insect, and gone out altogether with the advent of the chimpanzee.
If, as we grow older, we scrutinize our own past at the expense of
“problems,” it is simply because we handle memories more readily than
ideas.
The last whose disloyalty wre forgive are those we have disappointed.
What other people do we always feel we could do better. Unfortunately we
do not have the same feeling about what we ourselves do.
“I was the Prophet,” Mohammed informs us, “when Adam was still
between the water and the clay.” … When we have not had the pride to
found a religion—or at least to destroy one—how do we dare show
ourselves in the light of day?
Detachment cannot be learned: it is inscribed in a civilization. We do not
tend toward it, we discover it in ourselves. I was thinking this when I read
that a missionary, after eighteen years in Japan, had made only sixty
converts, and old ones at that Moreover they escaped him at the last
moment, dying in Japanese fashion, without remorse, without torments,
worthy descendants of their ancestors who, to inure themselves, In the days
of the Mongol wars, let themselves be impregnated by the nothingness of
all things and by their own nothingness.
We can meditate upon eternity only in a prone position. For a considerable
period, eternity was the Orientals’ principal concern: did they not prefer the
horizontal position? Once we lie down, time ceases to pass, to count.
History is the product of a race that stands. As a vertical animal, man was to
get into the habit of looking ahead, not only in space but in time as well. To
which wretched origins we may trace the Future!
Every misanthrope, however sincere, at times reminds me of that old poet,
bedridden and utterly forgotten, who in a rage with his contemporaries
declared he would receive none of them. His wife, out of charity, would
ring at the door from time to time….
A work is finished when we can no longer improve it, though we know it to
be inadequate and incomplete. We are so overtaxed by it that we no longer
have the power to add a single comma, however indispensable. What
determines the degree to which a work is done is not a requirement of art or
of truth, it is exhaustion and, even more, disgust.
Whereas any sentence one has to write requires a pretense of invention, it
takes little enough attention to enter into a text, even a difficult one. To
scribble a postcard comes closer to creative activity than to read The
Phenomenology of Mind.
Buddhism calls anger, “corruption of the mind,” manicheism “root of the
tree of death.” I know this, but what good does it do me to know?
She meant absolutely nothing to me. Realizing, suddenly, after so many
years, that whatever happens i shall never see her again, I nearly collapsed.
We understand what death is only by suddenly remembering the face of
someone who has been a matter of indifference to us.
As art sinks into paralysis, artists multiply. This anomaly ceases to be one if
we realize that art, on its way to exhaustion, has become both impossible
and easy.
No one is responsible for what he is nor even for what he does. This is
obvious and everyone more or less agrees that it is so. Then why celebrate
or denigrate? Because to exist is to evaluate, to emit judgments, and
because abstention, when it is not the effect of apathy or cowardice,
requires an effort no one manages to make.
Every form of haste, even toward the good, betrays some mental disorder.
The least impure thoughts are those which appear between our anxieties, in
the intervals of our annoyance, in those deluxe moments our misery grants
itself.
Imaginary pains are by far the most real we suffer, since we feel a constant
need for them and invent them because there is no way of doing without
them.
If it is characteristic of the wise man to do nothing useless, no one will
surpass me in wisdom: I do not even lower myself to useful things.
Impossible to imagine a degraded animal, a sub-animal.
O to have been born before man!
Try as I will, I cannot manage to scorn all those centuries during which men
busied themselves with nothing more than perfecting a definition of God.
The most effective way to avoid dejection, motivated or gratuitous, is to
take a dictionary, preferably of a language you scarcely know, and to look
up word after word in it, making sure that they are the kind you will never
use….
As long as you live on this side of the terrible, you will find words to
express it; once you know it from inside, you will no longer find a single
one.
There is no limit-disappointment.
Grievances of every kind pass, but their source abides, and nothing has any
effect on it: unassailable and unvarying, it is our fatum.
To realize, in rage and desolation alike, that nature, as Bossuet says, will not
long grant us “this morsel of matter she lends.”—This morsel of matter:. by
dint of pondering it we reach peace, though a peace it would be better never
to have known.
Paradox is not suited to burials, nor to weddings or births, in fact. Sinister—
or grotesque—events require commonplaces; the terrible, like the painful,
accommodates only the cliché.
However disabused one may be, it is impossible to live without any hope at
all. We always keep one, unwittingly, and this unconscious hope makes up
for all the explicit others we have rejected, exhausted.
The more laden he is with years, the more readily he speaks of his death as
a distant, quite unlikely event. Life is now such a habit that he has become
unfit for death.
A blind man, authentically blind for once, held out his hand: in his posture,
his rigidity, there was something that caught you, that made you hold your
breath. He was handing you his blindness.
We forgive only madmen and children for being frank with us: others, if
they have the audacity to imitate them, will regret it sooner or later.
To be “happy” you must constantly bear in mind the miseries you have
escaped. This would be a way for memory to redeem itself, since ordinarily
it preserves only disasters, eager—and with what success!—to sabotage
happiness.
After a sleepless night, the people in the street seem automatons. No one
seems to breathe, to walk. Each looks as if he is worked by clockwork:
nothing spontaneous; mechanical smiles, spectral gesticulations. Yourself a
specter, how would you see others as alive?
To be sterile—with so many sensations! Perpetual poetry without words.
Pure fatigue—fatigue without cause, the kind that comes like a gift or a
scourge: that is what helps me pull myself together, that is what affords me
knowledge of my “self.” Once it leaves me, I am no more than an inanimate
object.
Anything in folklore that remains alive comes from before Christianity. —
The same is true of whatever is alive in each of us.
A man who fears ridicule will never go far, for good or ill: he remains on
this side of his talents, and even if he has genius, he is doomed to
mediocrity.
“Amid your most intense activities, pause a moment to ‘consider’ your
mind”—this advice is surely not offered to those who “consider” their
minds night and day, and who thereby have no need to suspend their
activities, for the good reason that they engage in none.
Only what has been conceived in solitude, face to face with God, endures—
whether one is a believer or not
A passion for musk is in itself an avowal. We know more about a stranger
who yields himself up to it than about someone who Is deaf to musk and
whom we see every day.
No meditation without a tendency to repetitiveness.
As long as God had him in tow, man advanced slowly, so slowly he did not
even realize it. Now that he no longer lives in anyone’s shadow, he is in a
rush, and deplores it—he would give anything to regain the old cadence.
We have lost, being born, as much as we shall lose, dying. Everything.
Satiety—I have just now uttered this word, and already I no longer know
apropos of what, so readily does it apply to everything I feel and think, to
everything I love and loathe, to satiety itself.
I have killed no one, I have done better: I have killed the Possible, and like
Macbeth, what I need most is to pray, but like him too, I cannot say Amen.
4
To deliver Mows none of which land, to attack everyone without anyone’s
noticing, to shoot arrows whose poison you alone receive!
X, whom I have always treated as badly as I could, does not resent me
because he resents no one. He forgives every insult, he even forgets them.
How I envy him! To be like him, I should have to live through several
existences and exhaust all my possibilities of transmigration.
In the days when I set off on month-long bicycle trips across France, my
greatest pleasure was to stop in country cemeteries, to stretch out between
two graves, and to smoke for hours on end. I think of those days as the most
active period of my life.
How can you control yourself, master your behavior, when you come from
a country where people howl at funerals?
On certain mornings, no sooner have I stepped out the door than I hear
voices calling my name. Am I really me? Is it really my take another step, I
stood there nailed to the spot, petrified IMPOSSIBILITY—this ordinary word
came, more apropos than usual, to enlighten me as to myself, no less than as
to the word as well: it had so often come to my aid, yet never as now. At
last I understood, definitively, what it meant….
An ancient cleaning woman, in answer to my “How’s everything going?”
answers without looking up: “Taking its course.” This ultra-banal answer
nearly brings me to tears.
The more such turns of speech, which deal with becoming, with the
passage of time, with the course of things, are worn down, the more likely
they are to acquire the quality of a revelation. But the truth is not that they
create an exceptional state, only that you yourself were in that state without
realizing it, and that it required only a sign or a pretext for the extraordinary
to occur.
We lived in the country, I went to school, and—an important detail—I slept
in my parents’ room. At night it was my father’s habit to read aloud to my
mother. Though he was a Greek Orthodox priest, he would read anything,
doubtless assuming that at my age I wouldn’t understand. Usually I didn’t
even listen and fell asleep, unless the text was some gripping story. One
night I pricked up my ears. He was reading the scene from a biography of
Rasputin where the father, on his deathbed, calls his son to him and says:
“Go to Saint Petersburg and make yourself master of the city, fear nothing
and no one, for God is an old hog.”
Such an enormity in my father’s mouth, for whom the priesthood was not
a joke, impressed me as much as a conflagration or an earthquake. But I
also distinctly recall—this was over fifty years ago—that my emotion was
followed by a strange, dare I say a perverse pleasure.
Having penetrated, in the course of years, quite deeply into two or three
religions, I have always retreated on the threshold of “conversion,” lest I lie
to myself. None of them was, in my eyes, free enough to admit that
vengeance is a need, the most intense and profound of all, and that each
man must satisfy it, if only in words. If we stifle that need, we expose
ourselves to serious disturbances. More than one disorder—perhaps all
disorders—derive from a vengeance too long postponed. We must learn
how to explode! Any disease is healthier than the one provoked by a
hoarded rage.
Philosophy in the Morgue. “My nephew was obviously a failure. If he had
succeeded in making something of himself he would have had a different
ending than … this.” “You know, Madame,” I replied to the monumental
matron who had addressed me, “whether one succeeds or not comes down
to the same thing.” “You’re right,” she said, after a few seconds’ thought.
This unexpected acquiescence on the part of such a woman moved me
almost as much as the death of my friend.
Misfits … It seems to me that their adventure, more than any other, sheds a
light on the future, that they alone allow us to glimpse and to decipher it,
and that if we set their exploits aside we utterly disqualify ourselves from
describing the days to come.
“A pity,” you were saying, “that N has never produced anything.”
“So what! He exists. If he had given birth to books, if he had had the
misfortune to ‘realize’ himself, we wouldn’t have been talking about him
the last hour.” The advantage of being someone is rarer than that of
creating. To produce is easy; what is difficult is to scorn the use of one’s
gifts.
Filming a scene, there are countless takes of the same incident. Someone
watching in the street—obviously a provincial—can’t get over it: “After
this, I’ll never go to the movies again.”
One might react similarly with regard to anything whose underside one
has seen, whose secret one has seized. Yet, by an obnubilation which has
something of the miraculous about it, there are gynecologists who are
attracted to their patients, gravediggers who father children, incurables who
lay plans, skeptics who write….
T, a rabbi’s son, complains that this age of unprecedented persecutions has
seen the birth of no original prayer capable of being adopted by the
community and uttered in the synagogues. I assure him that he is mistaken
to be distressed or alarmed by the fact: the great disasters yield nothing on
the literary or religious level. Only the semi-misfortunes are fruitful,
because they can be, because they are a point of departure, whereas too
perfect a hell is almost as sterile as paradise.
I was twenty. Everything was a burden. One day I collapsed on a couch
with an “I can’t take it any longer.” My mother, already driven distracted by
my sleepless nights, told me she had just had a mass said for my “rest.” Not
one but thirty thousand, I would have liked to shout at her, thinking of the
figure Charles V inscribed in his will—for a much longer rest, true enough.
I ran across him again, quite by chance, after twenty-five years. Unchanged,
intact, fresher than ever, he actually seems to have retreated toward
adolescence.
Where has he been hiding, and what has he done to escape the action of
the years, to avoid our wrinkles and grimaces? And how has he lived, if in
fact he has lived at all? Actually, a ghost. He must have cheated, he has not
performed his duty as a living man, not played the game. A ghost, yes, and a
gate-crasher. I discern no sign of destruction on his countenance, none of
those marks which testify that one is a real being, an individual and not an
apparition. What can I say to him? I feel awkward, embarrassed, even
afraid. So greatly are we upset by anyone who escapes time, or merely
deceives it.
D.C, who was writing his recollections of childhood in his Rumanian
village, having told his neighbor, a peasant named Coman, that he wouldn’t
be left out, received a visit from the latter early the next day: “I know I’m a
worthless man but all the same I didn’t think I had fallen so low as to be
talked about in a book.”
How superior the oral world was to ours! Beings (I should say, peoples)
live in the truth only as long as they have a horror of the written. Once they
catch the virus, they enter the inauthentic, they lose their old superstitions to
acquire a new one, worse than all the others combined.
Incapable of getting up, nailed to my bed, I drift with the whims of my
memory, and I see myself wandering, as a child, in the Carpathians. One
day I stumbled on a dog whose master, doubtless to be rid of it, had tied it
to a tree; the animal was little more than a skeleton, so drained of life that it
barely had the strength to look at me, without being able to move. Yet it was
standing, that dog….
A stranger comes and tells me he has killed someone. He is not wanted by
the police because no one suspects him. I am the only one who knows he is
the killer. What am I to do? I lack the courage as well as the treachery (for
he has entrusted me with a secret—and what a secret!) to tum him in. I feel
I am his accomplice, and resign myself to being arrested and punished as
such. At the same time, I tell myself this would be too ridiculous. Perhaps I
shall go and denounce him all the same. And so on, until I wake up.
The interminable is the specialty of the indecisive. They cannot mark life
out for their own, and still less their dreams, in which they perpetuate their
hesitations, pusillanimities, scruples. They are ideally qualified for
nightmare.
A film about wild animals: endless cruelty in every latitude. “Nature,” a
torturer of genius, steeped in herself and her work, exults with good reason:
there is not a moment when what is alive fails to tremble, to make others
tremble. Pity is a strange luxury only the most perfidious and the fiercest
creature could invent, out of a need to punish and torture itself—out of
ferocity, still.
On a poster which, at a church door, announces The Art of the Fugue,
someone has scrawled in huge letters: God is dead. This apropos of the
composer who testifies that God, in the event of his decease, can revive
precisely while we are listening to certain cantatas, certain fugues!
We have spent a little over an hour together. He has used the time to show
off, and by dint of trying to say interesting things about himself, has
succeeded. If he had merely swaggered in moderation, I should have found
him a bore and left in a few minutes. By exaggerating, by playing the
peacock to perfection, he has come close enough to wit to show some. The
desire to appear subtle does not destroy subtlety. A mental defective, if he
could feel the longing to astonish, would manage to deceive us—would
even catch up with intelligence.
X, who is older than the patriarchs, after inveighing, during a long tête-àtête, against this one and that, tells me: “The great weakness of my life is
that I’ve never hated anyone.” Our hatred does not diminish with the years:
in fact, it mounts. That of an old man like X attains incredible proportions:
now insensitive to his former affections, he puts all his faculties at the
service of his rancors which, miraculously reinvigorated, will survive the
crumbling of his memory and even of his reason.
… The danger of frequenting the old is that when we find them so far
from detachment and so incapable of espousing it, we arrogate to ourselves
all the advantages they are supposed to have and do not. And it is inevitable
that our real or imaginary advance upon them in matters of weariness or
disgust should incite to presumption.
Every family has its own philosophy. One of my cousins, who died young,
once wrote me: “It’s all the way it’s always been and probably always will
be until there’s nothing left any more.”
Whereas my mother ended the last note she ever sent me with this
testamentary sentence: “Whatever people try to do, they’ll regret it sooner
or later.”
Nor can I even boast of having acquired this vice of regret by my own
setbacks. It precedes me, it participates in the patrimony of my tribe. What a
legacy, such unfitness for illusion!
A few kilometers from the village where I was born, there was a hamlet,
perched on a hill and inhabited solely by gypsies. In 1910 an amateur
ethnologist visited the place, accompanied by a photographer. He managed
to collect the inhabitants, who agreed to let their picture be taken, without
knowing what that meant. At the instant they were asked to hold still, an old
woman shrieked: “Watch out, they’re stealing our souls!” Whereupon they
all flung themselves upon the two visitors, who had the greatest difficulty
making their escape.
These half-savage gypsies—what were they but India, their land of origin
which, under these circumstances, was speaking through them?
In continual rebellion against my ancestry, I have spent my whole life
wanting to be something else: Spanish, Russian, cannibal—anything, except
what I was. It is an aberration to want to be different from what you are, to
espouse in theory any and every condition, except your own.
The day I read the list of nearly all the Sanskrit words that designate the
absolute, I realized that I had taken the wrong path, the wrong country, the
wrong idiom.
A friend, after I don’t know how many years of silence, writes that she
hasn’t much longer to live, and that she is preparing to “enter the
Unknown….” The cliché gives me a start. I find it hard to see what one
might enter by death. Any affirmation, in this realm, seems to me a
delusion. Death is not a state, perhaps not even a transition. Then what is it?
And by what cliché, in my turn, will I answer my friend?
I may change my opinion on the same subject, the same event, ten, twenty,
thirty times in the course of a single day. And to think that each time, like
the worst impostor, I dare utter the word “truth”!
Hale and hearty still, the woman dragged her husband after her, a tall,
hunched man, eyes staring; she dragged him as if he had been the survivor
of another age, an apoplectic and suppliant diplodocus.
An hour later, a second encounter: a neatly dressed old woman,
extremely stooped, “advanced” toward me; her body forming a perfect half
circle, she necessarily kept her eyes on the ground, doubtless counting her
unimaginable slow tiny footsteps. It was as if she were learning how to
walk, as if she were afraid of not knowing how and where to place her feet
in order to move.
… Everything is good which brings me closer to Buddha.
Despite her white hair, she still paraded up and down her part of the
sidewalk, looking for customers. I would run into her often, at three in the
morning, and never felt like going home until I had heard her tell a few
anecdotes or exploits. I have forgotten anecdotes and exploits alike, but not
the readiness with which, one night when I had begun storming against all
the sleeping ‘Vermin” of Paris, she broke in with her forefinger pointing to
heaven and: “What about the vermin up there?’
“Everything is without basis, without substance,” and I never repeat it to
myself without feeling something like happiness. Unfortunately there are so
many moments when I fail to repeat it to myself.
5
I read him for the shipwrecked feeling I get from anything he writes. At first
you follow, then you start going in circles, then you are caught up in a kind
of mild unmenacing whirlpool, and you tell yourself you’re sinking, and
then you do sink. But you don’t really drown—that would be too easy! You
come back up to the surface, you follow all over again, amazed to see he
seems to be saying something and to understand what it is, and then you
start going round and round again, and you sink once more…. All of which
is meant to be profound, and seems so. But once you come to your senses
you realize it’s only abstruse, obscure, and that the distance between real
profundity and the willed kind is as great as between a revelation and a
whim.
Anyone who gives himself up to writing believes—without realizing the
fact—that his work will survive the years, the ages, time itself. … If he felt,
while he was at work on it, that it was perishable, he would leave off where
he was, he could never finish. Activity and credulity are correlative terms.
“Laughter ceased, and after laughter smiles.” This apparently naive remark
by a biographer of Alexsandr Blok defines to perfection the program of any
and every downfall.
No easy matter, to speak of God when one is neither, a believer nor an
atheist: and it is undoubtedly the drama we all share, theologians included
—no longer capable of being either one or the other.
For a writer, progress toward detachment and deliverance is an
unprecedented disaster. He, more than anyone else, needs his defects: if he
triumphs over them, he is lost He must be careful, then, not to improve, for
if he succeeds, he will regret it bitterly.
We must beware of whatever insights we have into ourselves. Our selfknowledge annoys and paralyzes our daimon—this is where we should look
for the reason Socrates wrote nothing.
What makes bad poets worse is that they read only poets (just as bad
philosophers read only philosophers), whereas they would benefit much
more from a book of botany or geology. We are enriched only by
frequenting disciplines remote from our own. This is true, of course, only
for realms where the ego is rampant.
Tertullian tells us that in order to be cured, epileptics would go “and
greedily suck the blood of criminals slaughtered in the arena.” If I were to
heed my instinct, this would be the one type of medication, no matter what
the disease, which I would adopt.
What right have we to be annoyed by someone who calls us a monster? The
monster Is unique by definition, and solitude, even the solitude of infamy,
supposes something positive, a peculiar election, but undeniably an
election.
Two enemies—the same man divided.
“Never judge a man without putting yourself in his place.” This old proverb
makes all judgment impossible, for we judge someone only because, in fact,
we cannot put ourselves in his place.
If you love your independence, you must lend yourself, in order to protect
it, to every turpitude; you must risk ignominy itself.
Nothing more abominable than the critic and, a fortiori, the philosopher in
each of us: if I were a poet, I should behave like Dylan Thomas, who, when
people would discuss his poems in his presence, would drop to the floor in a
fit of convulsions.
Anyone who bestirs himself commits one injustice after the next, without a
trace of remorse. Just bad humor. —Remorse is for those who do nothing,
who cannot act. It replaces action for them, consoles them for their
inefiectuality.
Most of our troubles come from our first impulses. The slightest enthusiasm
costs more than a crime.
Since we remember clearly only our ordeals, it is ultimately the sick, the
persecuted, the victims in every realm who will have lived to the best
advantage. The others—the lucky ones—have a life, of course, but not the
memory of a life.
What a bore, someone who doesn’t deign to make an impression. Vain
people are almost always annoying, but they make an effort, they take the
trouble: they are bores who don’t want to be bores, and we are grateful to
them for that: we end by enduring them, even by seeking them out. On the
other hand, we turn livid with fury in the presence of someone who pays no
attention whatever to the effect he makes. What are we to say to him, and
what are we to expect from him? Either keep some vestiges of the monkey,
or else stay home.
Not the fear of effort but the fear of success explains more than one failure.
I’d like to pray with dagger-words. Unfortunately, if you pray at all, you
have to pray like everyone else. Wherein abides one of the greatest
difficulties of faith.
We dread the future only when we are not sure we can kill ourselves when
we want to.
Neither Bossuet, nor Malebranche, nor Fénelon deigned to mention the
Pensées: apparently Pascal didn’t strike them as sufficiently serious.
Fear is the antidote to boredom: the remedy must be stronger than the
disease.
If only I could reach the level of the man I would have liked to be! But
some power, increasing year by year, draws me down. Even to get back up
to my surface, I have to employ stratagems I cannot think of without
blushing.
There was a time when, in order to dispel any impulse of vengeance once I
had endured some affront, I would imagine myself quite still in my grave.
And I calmed down at once. We must not despise our corpse too much: it
can be useful on occasion.
Every thought derives from a thwarted sensation.
The only way to reach another person at any depth is to move toward what
is deepest in yourself. In other words, to take the opposite path from the one
followed by so-called generous minds.
If only I could say with that Hasidic rabbi: “The blessing of my life is that I
have never needed a thing before I possessed it!”
In permitting man, Nature has committed much more than a mistake in her
calculations: a crime against herself.
Fear creates consciousness—not natural fear but morbid fear. Otherwise
animals would have achieved a level of consciousness higher than ours.
As orangutang in the strict sense of the word, man is old; as historical
orangutang, he is comparatively recent: a parvenu who has not had time to
learn how to behave in life.
After certain experiences, we should change names, since we ourselves are
no longer the same. Everything assumes another aspect, starting with death.
Which seems close and desirable: we are reconciled to it, and we reach the
point of calling it “man’s best friend,” as Mozart does in a letter to his dying
father.
We must suffer to the end, to the moment when we stop believing in
suffering.
“Truth remains hidden to the man filled with desire and hatred”
(Buddha)…. Which is to say, to every man alive.
Won over by solitude, yet he remains in the world: a stylite without a pillar.
“You were wrong to count on me.” Who can speak in such terms? God and
the Failure.
Everything we achieve, everything that comes out of us, aspires to forget its
origins, and succeeds only by opposing us. Hence the negative sign that
marks all our successes.
There is nothing to say about anything. So there can be no limit to the
number of books.
Failure, even repeated, always seems fresh; whereas success, multiplied,
loses all interest, all attraction. It is not misfortune but happiness—insolent
happiness, it is true—which leads to rancor and sarcasm.
“An enemy is as useful as a Buddha.” Exactly, for our enemy watches over
us, keeps us from letting ourselves go. By indicating, by divulging our least
weakness, he leads us straight to our salvation, moves heaven and earth to
keep us from being unworthy of his image of us. Hence our gratitude to him
should be boundless.
We get a better hold of ourselves and of being when we have reacted
against negating, dissolving books—against their noxious power. Fortifying
books, actually, since they provoke the very energy which denies them. The
more poison they contain, the more salutary their effect, provided we read
them against the grain, as we should read any book, starting with the
catechism.
The greatest favor we can do an author is to forbid him to work during a
certain period. Short-term tyrannies are necessary—prohibitions which
would suspend all intellectual activity. Uninterrupted freedom of expression
exposes talent to a deadly danger, forces it beyond its means and keeps it
from stockpiling sensations and experiences. Unlimited freedom is a crime
against the mind.
Self-pity is not so sterile as we suppose. Once we feel its mere onset, we
assume a thinker’s attitude, and come to think of it, we come to think!
The stoic’s maxim, according to which we should submit uncomplainingly
to things which do not depend on ourselves, takes into account only
external misfortunes, which escape our will. But how to accommodate
ourselves to those which come from ourselves? If we are the source of our
ills, whom are we to confront? Ourselves? We manage, luckily, to forget
that we are the guilty parties, and moreover existence is tolerable only if we
daily renew this lie, this act of oblivion.
All my life, I have lived with the feeling that I have been kept from my true
place. If the expression “metaphysical exile” had no meaning, my existence
alone would afford it one.
The more gifted a man is, the less progress he makes on the spiritual level.
Talent is an obstacle to the inner life.
To save the word “grandeur” from officialdom, we should use it only
apropos of insomnia or heresy.
In classical India, the sage and the saint were combined in one and the same
person. To have any notion of such a success, we must imagine, if we can, a
fusion between resignation and ecstasy, between a cold stoic and a
disheveled mystic.
Being is suspect. Then what is to be said of “life,” which is its deviation and
stigma?
When someone tells us of an unfavorable opinion about ourselves, instead
of being distressed, we should think of all the “evil” we have spoken of
others, and realize that it is only justice that as much should be said of
ourselves. Ironically, no one is more vulnerable, more susceptible, and less
likely to acknowledge his own defects than the backbiter. Merely tell him
about the slightest reservation someone has made in his regard, and he will
lose countenance, lose his temper, and drown in his own bile.
Seen from the outside, harmony reigns in every sect, clan, and party; seen
from the inside, discord. Conflicts in a monastery are as frequent and as
envenomed as in any society. Even when they desert hell, men do so only to
reconstruct it elsewhere.
The least conversion is experienced as an advance. Fortunately there exist
exceptions.
One of my favorites is that eighteenth-century Jewish sect in which men
went over to Christianity in order to debase themselves; and another is that
South American Indian who, upon conversion, lamented that he must now
become the prey of worms instead of being eaten by his children, an honor
he would have enjoyed had he not abjured his tribe’s beliefs.
Only normal that man should no longer be interested in religion but in
religions, for only through them will he be in a position to understand the
many versions of his spiritual collapse.
When we recapitulate the stages of our career, it is humiliating to realize
that we have not had the disasters we deserved, the ones we were entitled to
expect.
In some men, the prospect of a more or less imminent end excites energy,
good or bad, and plunges them into a frenzy of activity. Artless enough to
try to perpetuate themselves by their endeavor, by their work, they move
heaven and earth to finish, to conclude it: not a moment to lose.
The same perspective invites others to founder in what’s-the-use, in a
stagnant clear-sightedness, in the unimpeachable truths of despond.
“My curse on the man who, in future editions of my works, knowingly
changes anything—a sentence, or only a word, a syllable, a letter, a
punctuation mark!” Is it the philosopher or the writer in Schopenhauer who
speaks this way? Both at once, and this conjunction (when we think of the
awful style of any philosophical work) is extremely rare. It is not a Hegel
who would have uttered such a curse. Nor any other major philosopher,
except Plato.
Nothing more aggravating than a seamless, unremitting irony which leaves
you no time to breathe and still less to think; which instead of being
inconspicuous, occasional, is massive, automatic, at the antipodes of its
essentially delicate nature. Which in any case is how it is used in Germany,
a nation which, having meditated upon it the most, is least capable of
wielding it.
Anxiety is not provoked: it tries to find a justification for itself, and in order
to do so seizes upon anything, the vilest pretexts, to which it clings once it
has invented them. A reality which precedes its particular expressions, its
varieties, anxiety provokes itself, engenders itself, it is “infinite creation,”
and as such is more likely to suggest the workings of the divinity than those
of the psyche.
Automatic melancholy: an elegiac robot.
At a grave, the words: game, imposture, joke, dream, come to mind.
Impossible to think that existence is a serious phenomenon. Certainty of
faking from the start, at bottom. Over the gate of our cemeteries should be
written: “Nothing Is Tragic. Everything Is Unreal.”
I shall not soon forget the expression of horror on what was his face, the
dread, the extreme suffering, and the aggression. No, he was not happy.
Never have I seen a man so uncomfortable in his coffin.
Look neither ahead nor behind, look into yourself, with neither fear nor
regret. No one descends into himself so long as he remains a slave of the
past or of the future.
Inelegant to reproach a man for his sterility, when that is his postulate, his
mode of achievement, his dream….
Nights when we have slept are as if they had never been. The only ones that
remain in our memory are the ones when we couldn’t close our eyes: night
means sleepless night.
In order not to have to resolve them, I have turned all my practical
difficulties into theoretical ones. Faced with the Insoluble, I breathe at
last….
To a student who wanted to know where I stood with regard to the author of
Zarathustra, I replied that I had long since stopped reading him. Why? “I
find him too naïve….”
I hold his enthusiasms, his fervors against him. He demolished so many
idols only to replace them with others: a false iconoclast, with adolescent
aspects and a certain virginity, a certain innocence inherent in his solitary’s
career. He observed men only from a distance. Had he come closer, he
could have neither conceived nor promulgated the superman, that
preposterous, laughable, even grotesque chimera, a crotchet which could
occur only to a mind without time to age, to know the long serene disgust of
detachment.
Marcus Aurelius Is much closer to me. Not a moment’s hesitation
between the lyricism of frenzy and the prose of acceptance: I find more
comfort, more hope even, in the weary emperor than in the thundering
prophet.
6
Appealing, that Hindu notion of entrusting our salvation to someone else, to
a chosen “saint,” and permitting him to pray in our place, to do anything in
order to save us. Selling our soul to God….
“Does talent have any need of passions? Yes, of many passions—repressed”
(Joubert). Not one moralist we cannot convert into a precursor of Freud.
It is always surprising to discover that the great mystics produced so much,
that they left so many treatises. Undoubtedly their intention was to celebrate
God and nothing else. This is true in part, but only in part.
We do not create a body of work without attaching ourselves to it,
without subjugating ourselves to it. Writing is the least ascetic of all actions.
When I lie awake far into the night, I am visited by my evil genius, as
Brutus was by his before the battle of Philippi.
“Do I look like someone who has something to do here on earth?” —That’s
what I’d like to answer the busybodies who inquire into my activities.
It has teen said that a metaphor “must be able to te drawn.” Whatever is
original and lasting in literature for at lost a century contradicts this remark.
For if anything has outlived its usefulness it is “coherent” metaphor, one
with explicit contours. It is against such metaphor that poetry has
unceasingly rebelled, to the point where a dead poetry is a poetry afflicted
with coherence.
Listening to the weather report, I feel a strong response to the words
“scattered rain.” Which certainly proves that poetry is in ourselves and not
in the expression, though scattered is an adjective capable of setting up a
certain vibration.
Once I formulate a doubt, or more exactly, once I feel the need to formulate
a doubt, I experience a curious, disturbing well-being. It would be far easier
for me to live without a trace of belief than without a trace of doubt.
Devasting doubt, nourishing doubt!
There is no fake sensation.
Withdraw into yourself, perceive there a silence as old as being, even
older….
If I detest man, I could not say with the same case: I detest the human
being, for in spite of everything there is something more, something
enigmatic and engaging in that word being which suggests qualities alien to
the idea of man.
In the Dhammapada, it is suggested that, in order to achieve deliverance,
we must be rid of the double yoke of Good and Evil. That Good itself
should be one of our fetters we are too spiritually retarded to be able to
admit. And so we shall not be delivered.
Everything turns on pain; the rest is accessory, even nonexistent, for we
remember only what hurts. Painful sensations being the only real ones, it is
virtually useless to experience others.
I believe with that madman Calvin that we are predestined to salvation or
damnation in our mother’s womb. We have already lived our life before
being born.
A free man is one who has discerned the inanity of all points of view; a
liberated man is one who has drawn the consequences of such discernment.
We had nothing to say to one another, and while I was manufacturing my
phrases I felt that the earth was falling through space and that I was falling
with it at a speed that made me dizzy.
Years and years to waken from that sleep in which the others loll; then years
and years to escape that awakening …
A task to be done, something I have undertaken out of necessity or choice:
no sooner have I started in than everything seems important, everything
attracts me, except that.
Think about those who haven’t long to live, who know that everything is
over and done with, except the time in which the thought of their end
unrolls. Deal with that time. Write for gladiators….
Erosion of our being by our infirmities: the resulting void is filled by the
presence of consciousness, what am I saying?—that void is consciousness
itself.
Moral disintegration when we spend time in a place that is too beautiful: the
self dissolves upon contact with paradise. No doubt it was to avoid this
danger that the first man made the choice he did.
All things considered, there have teen more affirmations than negations—at
least till now. So we may deny without remorse. Beliefs will always weigh
more in the scales.
The substance of a work is the impossible—what we have not been able to
attain, what could not te given to us: the sum of all the things which were
refused us.
Gogol, in hopes of a “regeneration,” journeys to Nazareth and discovers he
is as bored there as “in a Russian railroad station”—this is what happens to
us all when we look outside ourselves for what can exist only inside.
Kill yourself because you are what you are, yes, but not because all
humanity would spit in your face!
Why fear the nothing in store for us when it is no different from the nothing
which preceded us: this argument of the Ancients against the fear of death is
unacceptable as consolation. Before, we had the luck not to exist; now we
exist, and it is this particle of existence, hence of misfortune, which dreads
death. Particle is not the word, since each of us prefers himself to the
universe, at any rate considers himself equal to it.
When we discern the unreality of everything, we ourselves become unreal,
we begin to survive ourselves, however powerful our vitality, however
imperious our instincts. But they are no longer anything but false instincts,
and false vitality.
If you are doomed to devour yourself, nothing can keep you from it: a trifle
will impel you as much as a tragedy. Resign yourself to erosion at all times:
your fate wills it so.
To live is to lose ground.
To think that so many have succeeded in dying!
Impossible not to resent those who write us overwhelming letters.
In a remote province of India, everything was explained by dreams, and
what is more important, dreams were used to cure diseases as well. It was
according to dreams that business was conducted and matters of life and
death decided. Until the English came. Since then, one native said, “We no
longer dream.”
In what we have agreed to call “civilization,” there resides, undeniably, a
diabolic principle man has become conscious of too late, when it was no
longer possible to remedy it.
Lucidity without the corrective of ambition leads to stagnation. It is
essential that the one sustain the other, that the one combat the other without
winning, for a work, for a life to be possible.
We cannot forgive those we have praised to the skies, we are impatient to
break with them, to snap the most delicate chain of all: the chain of
admiration …, not out of insolence, but out of an aspiration to find our
bearings, to be free, to be … ourselves. Which we manage only by an act of
injustice.
The problem of responsibility would have a meaning only if we had been
consulted before our birth and had consented to be precisely who we are.
The energy and virulence of my taedium vitae continue to astound me. So
much vigor in a disease so decrepit! To this paradox I owe my present
incapacity to choose my final hour.
For our actions, for our vitality itself, the claim to lucidity is as ruinous as
lucidity itself.
Children turn, and must turn, against their parents, and the parents can do
nothing about it, for they are subject to a law which decrees the relations
among all the living: i.e., that each engenders his own enemy.
So carefully have we been taught to cling to things that when we would be
free of them, we do not know how to go about it. And if death did not come
to our aid, our stubbornness in subsisting would make us find a recipe for
existence beyond wearing out, beyond senility itself
Everything is wonderfully clear if we admit that birth is a disastrous or at
least an inopportune event; but if we think otherwise, we must resign
ourselves to the unintelligible, or else cheat like everyone else.
In a Gnostic work of the second century of our era, we read: “The prayer of
a melancholy man will never have the strength to rise unto God.” … Since
man prays only in despondency, we may deduce that no prayer has ever
reached its destination.
He was above all others, and had had nothing to do with it: he had simply
forgotten to desire….
In ancient China, women suffering from anger or grief would climb onto
platforms specially constructed for them in the street, and there would give
free rein to their fury or their lamentations. Such confessionals should be
revived and adopted the world over, if only to replace the obsolete ones of
the Church, or the ineffectual ones of various therapeutics.
This philosopher lacks keeping or, to use the jargon, “internal form.” He is
too fabricated to be alive or even “real”—a sinister puppet. What bliss to
know I shall never open his books again!
No one exclaims he is feeling well and that he is free, yet this is what all
who know this double blessing should do. Nothing condemns us more than
our incapacity to shout our good luck.
To have failed in everything, always, out of a love of discouragement!
The sole means of protecting your solitude is to offend everyone, beginning
with those you love.
A book is a postponed suicide.
Say what we will, death is the best thing nature has found to please
everyone. With each of us, everything vanishes, everything stops forever.
What an advantage, what an abuse! Without the least effort on our part, we
own the universe, we drag it into our own disappearance. No doubt about it,
dying is immoral. …
7
If instead of expanding you, putting you in a state of energetic euphoria,
your ordeals depress and embitter you, you can be sure you have no
spiritual vocation.
To live in expectation, to count on the future or on a simulacrum of the
future: we are so accustomed to it that we have conceived the idea of
immortality only out of a need to wait out eternity.
Every friendship is an inconspicuous drama, a series of subtle wounds.
Luther Dead by Lucas Fortnagel. A plebeian, aggressive, terrifying mask, as
of some sublime hog … which perfectly renders the features of the man we
cannot sufficiently praise for having declared: “Dreams are liars; if you shit
in your bed, that’s true.”
The more you live, the less useful it seems to have lived.
At twenty, those nights when for hours at a time I would stand, forehead
pressed against the pane, staring into the dark….
No autocrat wields a power comparable to that enjoyed by a poor devil
planning to kill himself.
Educating yourself not to leave traces is a moment-by-momcnt war against
yourself, solely to prove that you could, if you chose, become a sage….
To exist is a state as little conceivable as its contrary. No, still more
inconceivable.
In Antiquity, “books” were so costly that one could not accumulate them
unless one was a king, a tyrant, or … Aristotle, the first to possess a library
worthy of the name.
One more incriminating item in the dossier of a philosopher already so
catastrophic in so many regards.
If I were to conform to my most intimate convictions, I should cease to take
any action whatever, to react in any way. But I am still capable of
sensations….
A monster, however horrible, secretly attracts us, pursues us, haunts us. He
represents, enlarged, our advantages and our miseries, he proclaims us, he is
our standard-bearer.
Over the centuries, man has slaved to believe, passing from dogma to
dogma, illusion to illusion, and has given very little time to doubts, short
intervals between his epochs of blindness. Indeed they were not doubts but
pauses, moments of respite following the fatigue of faith, of any faith.
Innocence being the perfect state, perhaps the only one, it is
incomprehensible that a man enjoying it should seek to leave it. Yet history
from its beginnings down to ourselves is only that and nothing but that.
I draw the curtains, and I wait. Actually, I am not waiting for anything, I am
merely making myself absent. Scoured, if only for a few minutes, of the
impurities which dim and clog the mind, I accede to a state of
consciousness from which the self is evacuated, and I am as soothed as if I
were resting outside the universe.
In one medieval exorcism, all the parts of the body, even the smallest, are
listed from which the demon is ordered to depart: a kind of lunatic anatomy
treatise, fascinating for its hypertrophy of precision, its profusion of
unexpected details. A scrupulous incantation. Leave the nails! Fanatic but
not without poetic effect. For authentic poetry has nothing in common with
“poetry.”
In all our dreams, even if they deal with the Flood, there Is always, if only
for a fraction of a second, some minuscule Incident we witnessed the day
before. This regularity, which I have verified for years, is the only constant,
the only law or semblance of law I have been able to discern In night’s
incredible chaos.
The dissolving power of conversation. One realizes why both meditation
and action require silence.
The certainty of being only an accident has accompanied me on all
occasions, propitious or injurious, and if it has saved me from the
temptation to believe myself necessary, it has not on the other hand entirely
cured me of a certain vainglory inherent in the loss of illusions.
Rare to come upon a free mind, and when you do, you realize that the best
of such a mind is not revealed in its works (when we write we bear,
mysteriously, chains) but in those confidences where, released from
conviction and pose, as from all concern with rigor or standing, it displays
its weaknesses. And where it behaves as a heretic to itself.
If the foreigner is not a creator in the matter of language, it is because he
wants to do as well as the natives: whether or not he succeeds, this ambition
is his downfall.
I begin a letter over and over again, I get nowhere: what to say and how to
say it? I don’t even remember whom I was writing to. Only passion or
profit find at once the right tone. Unfortunately detachment is indifference
to language, insensitivity to words. Yet It is by losing contact with words
that we lose contact with human beings.
Everyone has had, at a given moment, an extraordinary experience which
will be for him, because of the memory of it he preserves, the crucial
obstacle to his Inner metamorphosis.
I know peace only when my ambitions sleep. Once they waken, anxiety
repossesses me. Life is a state of ambition. The mole digging his tunnels Is
ambitious. Ambition is in effect everywhere, and we see its traces on the
faces of the dead themselves.
Going to India because of the Vedanta or Buddhism is about the same as
going to France because of Jansenism. Moreover the latter is more recent,
since it vanished only three centuries ago.
Not the slightest trace of reality anywhere—except in my sensations of
unreality.
Existence would be a quite impracticable enterprise if we stopped granting
importance to what has none.
Why docs the Gita rank “renunciation of the fruit of actions” so high?
Because such renunciation is rare, impracticable, contrary to our nature, and
because achieving it is destroying the man one has been and one is, killing
in oneself the entire past, the work of millennia—in a word, freeing oneself
of the Species, that hideous and immemorial riffraff.
We should have abided by our larval condition, dispensed with evolution,
remained incomplete, delighting in the elemental siesta and calmly
consuming ourselves in an embryonic ecstasy.
Truth abides in the individual drama. If I suffer authentically, I suffer much
more than an individual, I transcend the sphere of my selfhood, I rejoin the
essence of others. The only way to proceed toward the universal is to
concern ourselves exclusively with what concerns ourselves.
When we are fixated on doubt, we take more pleasure in lavishing
speculations upon it than in practicing it.
If you want to know a nation, frequent its second-order writers: they alone
reflect its true nature. The others denounce or transfigure the nullity of their
compatriots, and neither can nor will put themselves on the same level.
They are suspect witnesses.
In my youth there would be weeks during which I never closed my eyes. I
lived in the unlived world, I had the sense that Time, with all its moments,
had concentrated itself within me, where it culminated, where it triumphed.
I moved it onward, of course, I was its promoter and bearer, its cause and
substance, and it was as an agent and accomplice that I participated in its
apotheosis. When sleep departs from us, the unheard-of becomes everyday,
easy: we enter it without preparations, inhabit it, wallow in it.
Astounding, the number of hours I have wasted on ? the “meaning” of what
exists, of what happens…. But that “what” has no meaning, as all serious
minds know. Hence they devote their time and their energy to more useful
undertakings.
My affinities with Russian Byronism, from Pechorin to Stavro-gin, my
boredom and my passion for boredom.
X, whom I do not particularly appreciate, was telling a story so stupid that I
wakened with a start: those we don’t like rarely shine in our dreams.
For lack of occupation, the old seem to be trying to solve something very
complicated, devoting to it all the capacities they still possess. Perhaps this
is why they do not commit suicide en masse, as they ought were they even a
trifle less absorbed.
Love at its most impassioned does not bring two human beings so close
together as calumny. Inseparable, slanderer and slandered constitute a
“transcendent” unity, forever welded one to the other. Nothing can separate
them. One inflicts harm, the other endures it, but if he endures it, it is
because he is accustomed to doing so, can no longer do without it, even
insists upon it. He knows that his wishes will be gratified, that he will never
be forgotten, that whatever happens he will be eternally present in the mind
of his indefatigable benefactor.
The monk-errant, the wandering friar—so far, the supreme achievement. To
reach the point of no longer having anything to renounce! Such must be the
dream of any disabused mind.
Sobbing negation—the only tolerable form of negation.
Lucky Job, who was not obliged to annotate his lamentations!
Late at night I feel like falling into a frenzy, doing some unprecedented
thing to release myself, but I don’t see against whom, against what …
Mme d’Heudicourt, Saint-Simon observes, had never spoken good of
anyone In her life without adding some crushing “but’s.” A wonderful
definition, not of backbiting but of conversation in general.
Everything that lives makes noise. What an argument for the mineral
kingdom!
Bach was quarrelsome, litigious, self-serving, greedy for titles and honors,
etc. So what! A musicologist listing the cantatas whose theme is death has
remarked that no mortal ever had such a nostalgia for it. Which is all that
counts. The rest has to do with biography.
The misfortune of being incapable of neutral states except by reflection and
effort. What an idiot achieves at the outset, we must struggle night and day
to attain, and only by fits and starts!
I have always lived with the vision of a host of moments marching against
me. Time will have been my Birnam Wood.
Painful or wounding questions asked by the uncouth distress and anger us,
and may have the same effect as certain techniques of Oriental meditation.
Who knows if a dense, aggressive stupidity might not provoke
illumination? It is certainly worth as much as a rap on the head with a stick.
Knowledge is not possible, and even if it were, would solve nothing. Such
is the doubter’s position. What does he want, then—what is he looking for?
Neither he nor anyone will ever know. Skepticism is the rapture of impasse.
Besieged by others, I try to make my escape, without much success, it must
be confessed. Yet I manage to wangle myself, day by day, a few seconds’
audience with the man I would have liked to be.
By a certain age, we should change names and hide out somewhere, lost to
the world, in no danger of seeing friends or enemies again, leading the
peaceful life of an overworked malefactor.
We cannot reflect and be modest. Once the mind is set to work, it replaces
God and anything else. It is indiscretion, encroachment, profanation. It does
not build, it dislocates. The tension its methods betray reveals its brutal,
implacable character: without a good dose of ferocity, we could not follow a
thought to its conclusion.
Most subverters, visionaries, and saviors have been either epileptics or
dyspeptics. There is unanimity as to the virtues of epilepsy; gastric
upheavals are regarded, on the other hand, as less meritorious. Yet nothing
is more conducive to subversion than a digestion which refuses to be
forgotten.
My mission Is to suffer for all those who suffer without knowing it. I must
pay for them, expiate their unconsciousness, their luck to be ignorant of
how unhappy they are.
Each time Time torments me, I tell myself that one of us must back down,
that it is impossible for this cruel confrontation to go on indefinitely.
When we are in the depths of depression, everything which feeds it, affords
it further substance, also raises it to a level where we can no longer follow
and thereby renders it too great, excessive: scarcely surprising that we
should reach the point of no longer regarding it as our own.
A foretold misfortune, when at last it occurs, is ten, is a hundred times
harder to endure than one we did not expect. All during our apprehensions,
we lived through it in advance, and when it happens these past torments are
added to the present ones, and together they form a mass whose weight is
intolerable.
Obviously God was a solution, and obviously none so satisfactory will ever
be found again.
I shall never utterly admire anyone except a man dishonored—and happy.
There is a man, I should say, who defies the opinion of his fellows and who
finds consolation and happiness in himself alone.
The man of the Rubicon, after Pharsalus, had forgiven too many. Such
magnanimity seemed offensive to those of his friends who had betrayed
him and whom he had humiliated by treating them without rancor. They felt
diminished, flouted, and punished him for his clemency or for his disdain:
he had refused to stoop to resentment! Had he behaved as a tyrant, they
would have spared him. But they could not forgive him, since he had not
deigned to frighten them enough.
Everything that is engenders, sooner or later, nightmares. Let us try,
therefore, to invent something better than being.
Philosophy, which had made it its business to undermine beliefs, when it
saw Christianity spreading and on the point of prevailing, made common
cause with paganism, whose superstitions seemed preferable to the
triumphant insanities. By attacking and demolishing the gods, philosophy
had intended to free men’s minds; in reality, it handed them over to a new
servitude, worse than the old one, for the god who was to replace the gods
had no particular weakness for either tolerance or irony.
Philosophy, it will be objected, is not responsible for the advent of this
god, indeed this was not the god philosophy recommended. No doubt, but it
should have suspected that we do not subvert the gods with impunity, that
others would come to take their place, and that it had nothing to gain by the
exchange.
Fanaticism is the death of conversation. We do not gossip with a candidate
for martyrdom. What are we to say to someone who refuses to penetrate our
reasons and who, the moment we do not bow to his, would rather die than
yield? Give us dilettantes and sophists, who at least espouse all reasons….
We invest ourselves with an abusive superiority when we tell someone what
we think of him and of what he does. Frankness is not compatible with a
delicate sentiment, nor even with an ethical exigency.
More than all others, our relatives are ready to doubt our merits. It is a
universal rule: Buddha himself did not escape it—one of his cousins
opposed him the most, and only afterward Mara, the devil.
For the victim of anxiety, there is no difference between success and fiasco.
His reaction to the one is the same as to the other: both trouble him equally.
When I torment myself a little too much for not working, I tell myself that I
might just as well be dead and that then I would be working still less….
Rather in a gutter than on a pedestal.
The advantages of a state of eternal potentiality seem to me so considerable
that when I begin listing them, I can’t get over the fact that the transition to
Being could ever have occurred.
Existence = Torment. The equation seems obvious to me, but not to one of
my friends. How to convince him? I cannot lend him my sensations; yet
only they would have the power to persuade him, to give him that
additional dose of ill-being he has so insistently asked for all this time.
If we see things black, it is because we weigh them in the dark, because
thoughts are generally the fruit of sleeplessness, consequently of darkness.
They cannot adapt to life because they have not been thought with a view to
life. The notion of the consequences they might involve doesn’t even occur
to the mind. We are beyond all human calculation, beyond any notion of
salvation or perdition, of being or non-being, we are in a particular silence,
a superior modality of the void.
Not yet to have digested the affront of being born.
To expend oneself in conversations as much as an epileptic in his fits.
In order to conquer panic or some tenacious anxiety, there is nothing like
imagining your own burial. An effective method, readily available to all In
order not to have to resort to it too often in the course of a day, best to
experience its benefit straight off, when you get up. Or else use It only at
exceptional moments, like Pope Innocent IX, who, having commissioned a
painting in which he was shown on his deathbed, glanced at It each time he
had to make some important decision.
There is no negator who is not famished for some catastrophic yes.
We may be sure that man will never reach depths comparable to those he
knew during the ages of egoistic colloquy with bis God.
Not one moment when I am not external to the universe! … No sooner have
I lamented over myself, pitying my wretched condition, than I realize that
the terms in which I described my misfortune were precisely those which
define the first characteristic of the “supreme being.”
Aristotle, Aquinas, Hegel—three enslavers of the mind. The worst form of
despotism is the system, in philosophy and in everything.
God is what survives the evidence that nothing deserves to be thought.
When I was young, no pleasure compared with the pleasure of making
enemies. Now, whenever I make one, my first thought is to be reconciled,
so that I won’t have to bother about him. Having enemies is a heavy
responsibility. My burden is sufficient, I no longer can carry that of others
as well.
Joy is a light which devours itself, inexhaustibly; it is the sun early on.
A few days before he died, Claudel remarked that we should not call God
infinite but inexhaustible. As if it did not come down to the same thing, or
just about! All the same, this concern for exactitude, this verbal scruple at
the moment that he was writing that his “lease” on life had nearly expired,
is more inspiring than a “sublime” word or gesture.
The unusual is not a criterion. Paganini is more surprising and more
unpredictable than Bach.
We should repeat to ourselves, every day: I am one of the billions dragging
himself across the earth’s surface. One, and no more. This banality justifies
any conclusion, any behavior or action: debauchery, chastity, suicide, work,
crime, sloth, or rebellion, … Whence it follows that each man is right to do
what he does.
Tsimtsum. This silly-sounding word designates a major concept of the
Cabbala. For the world to exist, God, who was everything and everywhere,
consented to shrink, to leave a vacant space not inhabited by Himself: it is
in this “hole” that the world occurred.
Thus we occupy the wasteland He conceded to us out of pity or whim.
For us to exist, He contracted, He limited His sovereignty. We are the
product of His voluntary reduction, of His effacement, of His partial
absence. In His madness He has actually amputated Himself for us. If only
He had had the good sense and the good taste to remain whole!
In the “Gospel According to the Egyptians,” Jesus proclaims: “Men will be
the victims of death so long as women give birth.” And he specifies: “I am
come to destroy the works of woman.”
When we frequent the extreme truths of the Gnostics, we should like to
go, if possible, still further, to say something never said, which petrifies or
pulverizes history, something out of a cosmic Neronianism, out of a
madness on the scale of matter.
To express an obsession is to project it outside yourself, to hunt it down, to
exorcise it. Obsessions are the demons of a world without faith.
Man accepts death but not the hour of his death. To die any time, except
when one has to die!
Once we step into a cemetery, a feeling of utter mockery does away with
any metaphysical concern. Those who look for “mystery” everywhere do
not necessarily get to the bottom of things. Most often “mystery,” like “the
absolute,” corresponds only to a mannerism of the mind. It is a word we
should use only when we cannot do otherwise, in really desperate cases.
If I recapitulate my plans which have remained plans and those which have
worked out, I have every reason to regret that these latter have not suffered
the fate of the former.
“He who is inclined to lust is merciful and tender-hearted; those who are
inclined to purity are not so” (Saint John Climacus). It took a saint, neither
more nor less, to denounce so distinctly and so vigorously not the lies but
the very essence of Christian morality, and indeed of all morality.
We are not afraid to accept the notion of an uninterrupted sleep; on the other
hand an eternal awakening (immortality, if it were conceivable, would be
just that) plunges us into dread. Unconsciousness is a country, a fatherland;
consciousness, an exile.
Any profound impression is voluptuous or funereal—or both at once.
No one has been so convinced as I of the futility of everything; and no one
has taken so tragically so many futile things.
Ishi, the last American Indian of his tribe, after hiding for years in terror of
the White Men, reduced to starvation, surrendered of his own free will to
the exterminators of his people, believing that the same treatment was in
store for himself. He was made much of. He had no posterity, he was truly
the last.
Once humanity is destroyed or simply extinguished, we may imagine a
sole survivor who would wander the earth, without even having anyone to
surrender to….
Deep in his heart, man aspires to rejoin the condition he had before
consciousness. History is merely the detour he takes to get there.
Only one thing matters: learning to be the loser.
Every phenomenon is a corrupt version of another, larger phenomenon:
time, a disease of eternity; history, a disease of time; life, again, a disease of
matter.
Then what is normal, what is healthy? Eternity? Which itself is only an
infirmity of God.
8
Without the notion of a failed universe, the spectacle of injustice in every
system would put even an abulic into a straitjacket.
Annihilating affords a sense of power, flatters something obscure,
something original in us. It is not by erecting but by pulverizing that we
may divine the secret satisfactions of a god. Whence the lure of destruction
and the illusions it provokes among the frenzied of any era.
Each generation lives in the absolute: it behaves as if it had reached the
apex if not the end of history.
Any and every nation, at a certain moment of its career, considers itself
chosen. It is at this moment that it gives the best and the worst of itself.
No accident that the Trappist order was founded in France rather than in
Italy or Spain. Granted the Spanish and the Italians talk ceaselessly, but
they do not hear themselves talk, whereas the Frenchman relishes his
eloquence, never forgets he is talking, is consummately conscious of the
fact He alone could regard silence as an ordeal, as an askesis.
What spoils the French Revolution for me is that it all happens on stage,
that its promoters are born actors, that the guillotine is merely a decor. The
history of France, as a whole, seems a bespoke history, an acted history:
everything in it is perfect from the theatrical point of view. It is a
performance, a series of gestures and events which are watched rather than
suffered, a spectacle that takes ten centuries to put on. Whence the
impression of frivolity which even the Terror affords, seen from a distance.
Prosperous societies are far more fragile than the others, since it remains for
them to achieve only their own ruin, comfort not being an ideal when we
possess it, still less of one when it has been around for generations. Not to
mention the fact that nature has not included well-being in her calculations
and could not do so without perishing herself.
If all peoples turned apathetic at once, there would be no more conflicts, no
more wars, no more empires. But unfortunately there are young peoples,
and indeed young people—a major obstacle to the philanthropists’ dreams:
to bring it about that all men might reach the same degree of lassitude or
ineffectual-Ity….
We must side with the oppressed on every occasion, even when they are in
the wrong, though without losing sight of the fact that they are molded of
the same clay as their oppressors.
Characteristic of dying regimes: to permit a confused mixture of beliefs and
doctrines, and to give the Illusion, at the same time, that the moment of
choice can be indefinitely postponed …
This is the source—the sole source—of the charm of pre-revolutionary
periods.
Only false values prevail, because everyone can assimilate them, counterfeit
them (false thereby to the second degree). An idea that succeeds is
necessarily a pseudo-idea.
Revolutions are the sublime of bad literature.
The unfortunate thing about public misfortunes is that everyone regards
himself as qualified to talk about them.
The right to suppress everyone that bothers us should rank first in the
constitution of the ideal State.
The only thing the young should be taught is that there is virtually nothing
to be hoped for from life. One dreams of a Catalogue of Disappointments
which would include all the disillusionments reserved for each and every
one of us, to be posted in the schools.
According to the Princess Palatine, Mme de Maintenon was in the habit of
repeating, during the years after the king’s death when she had no further
role to play: “For some time now, there has prevailed a spirit of vertigo
which is spreading everywhere.’ This “spirit of vertigo” is what the losers
have always noticed, correctly moreover, and we might well reconsider all
history from the perspective of this formula.
Progress is the injustice each generation commits with regard to its
predecessor.
The surfeited hate themselves—not secretly but publicly, and long to be
swept away, one way or another. They prefer, in any case, that the sweeping
be accomplished with their own cooperation. This is the most curious, the
most original aspect of a revolutionary situation.
A nation generates only one revolution. The Germans have never repeated
the exploit of the Reformation, or rather, they have repeated but not equaled
it. France has remained an eternal tributary of ‘89. Equally true of Russia
and of all nations, this tendency to plagiarize oneself in regard to
revolutions is at once reassuring and distressing.
Romans of the decadence enjoyed only what they called Greek leisure
(otium graecum), the thing they had most despised in the period of their
vigor. The analogy with today’s civilizations is so flagrant it would be
indecent to insist on it.
Alaric claimed that a “demon” drove him against Rome. Every exhausted
civilization awaits its barbarian, and every barbarian awaits his demon.
The West: a sweet-smelling rottenness, a perfumed corpse.
All these nations were great because they had great prejudices. They now
have none. Are they nations still? At most, disintegrated crowds.
The white race increasingly deserves the name given by the American
Indians: palefaces.
In Europe, happiness stops at Vienna. Beyond, misery upon misery, since
the beginning.
The Romans, the Turks, and the British could found lasting empires
because, refractory to all doctrine, they imposed none upon the subject
nations. They would never have managed to wield so long a hegemony had
they been afflicted with some messianic vice Unhoped-for oppressors,
administrators, and parasites, lords without convictions, they had the art of
combining authority and indifference, rigor and abandon. It is this art, the
secret of the true master, which the Spaniards of old lacked, as it is lacking
in the conquerors of our own day.
So long as a nation keeps the awareness of its superiority, it is fierce and
respected; once it loses that awareness, a nation becomes humanized, and
no longer counts.
When I rage against the age, I can calm myself merely by thinking of what
will happen, of the retrospective jealousy of those who come after us, in
certain respects, we belong to the old humanity, the humanity that could
still regret paradise. But those who come after us will not even have the
recourse of that regret, they will not even have an idea of it, not even the
word!
My vision of the future is so exact that if I had children, I should strangle
them here and now.
When we think of the Berlin salons in the Romantic period, of the role
played in them by a Henrietta Herz or a Rachel Levin, of the friendship
between the latter and Crown Prince Louis-Ferdinand; and when we then
think that if such women had lived in this century they would have died in
some gas chamber, we cannot help considering the belief in progress as the
falsest and stupidest of superstitions.
Hesiod was the first to elaborate a philosophy of history. And also launched
the notion of decadence. By doing so, what a light he casts on historical
process! If, at the very outset, in the heart of the post-Homeric world, he
decided that humanity was In its Iron age, what would he have said a few
centuries later—what would he say today?
Except in periods clouded over by frivolity or Utopia, man has always
believed himself on the threshold of the worst. Knowing what he knew, by
what miracle could he have unceasingly varied his desires and his terrors?
When, just after the First World War, electricity was installed in the village
where I was born, there was a general murmur of protest, then mute
desolation. But when electricity was installed in the churches (there were
three), everyone was convinced the Antichrist had come and, with him, the
end of time.
These Carpathian peasants had seen clearly, had seen far: Emerging from
prehistory, they knew already, in that day and age, what “civilized” men
have known only recently.
It is my prejudice against everything that turns out well that has given me a
taste for reading history.
Ideas are unsuited to a final agony; they die, of course, but without
knowing how to die, whereas an event exists only with a view to its end. A
sufficient reason to prefer the company of historians to that of philosophers.
During his famous embassy to Rome in the second century b.c., Carneades
took advantage of the occasion to speak the first day in favor of the idea of
justice, and on the following day against it. From that moment, philosophy,
hitherto nonexistent in that country of healthy conduct, began to perpetrate
its ravages. What is philosophy, then? The worm in the fruit….
Cato the Censor, who had been present at the Greek’s dialectical
performances, was alarmed by them and asked the Senate to satisfy the
Athenian delegation as soon as possible, so harmful and even dangerous did
he consider their presence. Roman youth was not to frequent minds so
destructive.
On the moral level, Carneades and his companions were as formidable as
the Carthaginians on the military. Rising nations fear above all the absence
of prejudices and prohibitions, the intellectual shamelessness which
constitutes the allure of declining civilizations.
Hercules was punished for having succeeded in all his undertakings.
Similarly Troy, too happy, had to perish.
Pondering this vision shared by the tragic poets, we cannot help thinking
that the so-called free world, upon which every fortune has been lavished,
will inevitably suffer Ilion’s fate, for the jealousy of the gods survives their
disappearance.
“The French don’t want to work any more, they all want to write, my
concierge told me, unaware that she was then and there passing judgment
on all old civilizations.
A society is doomed when it no longer has the force to be limited. How,
with an open mind—too open—can it protect itself against the excesses, the
mortal risks of freedom?
Ideological disputes reach the point of paroxysm only in countries where
men have fought each other over words, where they have gone to death for
words …, in the countries, in short, which have known wars of religion.
A nation which has exhausted its mission is like an author who repeats
himself—no, who has nothing left to say. For to repeat yourself is to prove
that you still believe in yourself, and in what you have said. But a declining
nation no longer has even the strength to mouth its old mottoes, which once
had assured it its preeminence and its pride.
French has become a provincial language. The natives don’t mind. Only the
foreigner is inconsolable on its account—he alone goes into mourning for
Nuance….
Themistocles, by a unanimously approved decree, had the interpreter of
Xerxes’ ambassadors put to death “for having dared use the Greek language
to express the orders of a barbarian.”
A people commits such an act only at the peak of its career. It is
decadent, it is dying, when it no longer believes in its language, when it
stops believing that its language is the supreme form of expression, the
language.
A nineteenth-century philosopher maintained, In his innocence, that la
Rochefoucauld was right for the past, but that he would be invalidated by
the fixture. The Idea of progress dishonors the intellect.
The further man proceeds, the less he is in a position to solve his problems,
and when, at the apex of his blindness, he will be convinced he is on the
point of success, then the unheard-of will occur.
I would bestir myself, at best, for the Apocalypse, but for a revolution … To
collaborate with an ending or a genesis, an ultimate or initial calamity, yes,
but not with a change for some better or worse….
We have convictions only if we have studied nothing thoroughly.
In the long run, tolerance breeds more ills than intolerance. If this is true, it
constitutes the most serious accusation that can be made against man.
Once the animals no longer need to fear each other, they fall into a daze and
take on that dumbfounded look they have in zoos. Individuals and’ nations
would afford the same spectacle if some day they managed to live in
harmony, no longer trembling openly or in secret.
With sufficient perspective, nothing is good or bad. The historian who
ventures to judge the past is writing journalism in another century.
In two hundred years (let us be precise!), the survivors of the overly
fortunate nations will be put on reservations and visited, contemplated with
disgust, commiseration, or stupor, and with a malicious admiration as well.
Monkeys living in groups reject, apparently, those which in some fashion
have consorted with humans. How one regrets that Swift never knew such a
detail!
Are we to execrate our age—or all ages?
Do we think of Buddha withdrawing from the world on account of his
contemporaries?
If humanity has such love for saviors, those fanatics who so shamelessly
believe in themselves, it is because humanity supposes they believe in it.
The strength of this Statesman is to be visionary and cynical. A dreamer
without scruples.
The worst crimes are committed out of enthusiasm, a morbid state
responsible for almost all public and private disasters.
The future appeals to you? All yours! Myself I prefer to keep to the
incredible present and the incredible past. I leave it to you to face the
Incredible itself.
“You’re against everything that’s been done since the last war,” said the
very up-to-date lady.
“You’ve got the wrong date: I’m against everything that’s been done
since Adam.”
Hitler is without a doubt the most sinister character in history. And the most
pathetic. He managed to achieve precisely the opposite of what he wanted,
he destroyed his ideal point by point. It is for this reason that he is a
monster in a class by himself—that is, a monster twice over, for even his
pathos is monstrous.
All great events have been set in motion by madmen, by mediocre madmen.
Which will be true, we may be sure, of the “end of the world” itself.
The Zohar teaches that those who do evil on earth were no better in heaven,
that they were impatient to leave it, and, rushing to the mouth of the abyss,
that they “arrived ahead of the time when they were to descend into this
world.”
One readily discerns the profundity of this vision of the pre-existence of
souls, and its usefulness when we are to explain the assurance and the
triumph of the “wicked,” their solidity and their competence. Having
prepared their endeavors so far ahead, it is not astonishing that they should
possess the earth: they conquered it before they were here …, an eternity
ago, and for all eternity, as a matter of fact.
What distinguishes the true prophet from the rest is that he stands at the
origin of movements and doctrines which exclude and oppose each other.
In a metropolis as in a hamlet, what we still love best is to watch the fall of
one of our kind.
The appetite for destruction is so deeply anchored within us that no one
manages to extirpate it. It belongs to our constitution, for the very basis of
our being is demoniac.
The sage is a pacified, withdrawn destroyer. The others are destroyers in
practice.
Misfortune is a passive, endured state, while malediction supposes an
election à rebours, consequently a notion of mission, of inner power, which
is not implied in misfortune. An accursed individual or nation necessarily
outclasses an unfortunate individual or nation.
Strictly speaking, history docs not repeat itself, but since the illusions man
is capable of are limited in number, they always return in another disguise,
thereby giving some ultradecrepit filth a look of novelty and a tragic glaze.
I read some pages on Jovinian, Saint Basil, and several others. The conflict,
during the first centuries of Christianity, between orthodoxy and heresy
seems no more insane than the one to which modern ideologies have
accustomed us. The modalities of the controversy, the passions at work, the
follies and the absurdities, are almost identical. In both cases, everything
turns on the unreal and the unverifiable, which form the very basis of either
religious or political dogmas. History would be tolerable only if we escaped
both kinds. True, it would then cease altogether, for the great good of
everyone—those who endure it as well as those who make it.
What makes destruction suspect is its facility: anyone who comes along can
excel in it. But if to destroy is easy, to destroy oneself is less so. Superiority
of the outcast over the agitator or the anarchist.
Had I lived in the early period of Christianity, I too, I fear, would have
yielded to its seduction. And I hate that sympathizer, that hypothetical
fanatic: I cannot forgive myself that conversion of two thousand years
ago….
Tom between violence and disillusionment, I seem to myself a terrorist
who, going out in the street to perpetrate some outrage, stops on the way to
consult Ecclesiastes or Epictetus.
According to Hegel, man will be completely free only “by surrounding
himself with a world entirely created by himself.”
But this is precisely what he has done, and man has never been so
enchained, so much a slave as now.
Life would become endurable only among a humanity which would no
longer have any illusions in reserve, a humanity completely disabused and
delighted to be so.
Everything I have been able to feel and to think coincides with an exercise
in anti-utopia.
Man will not last. Ambushed by exhaustion, he will have to pay for his toooriginal career. For it would be inconceivable and contra naturam that he
drag on much longer and come to a good end. This prospect is depressing,
hence likely.
“Enlightened despotism”: the only regime that can attract a disabused mind,
one incapable of being the accomplice of revolutions since it is not even the
accomplice of history.
Nothing more painful than two contemporary prophets. One must withdraw,
must disappear if he is unwilling to expose himself to ridicule. Unless both
are thus exposed, which would be the most equitable solution.
I am stirred, even overwhelmed each time I happen upon an innocent
person. Where does he come from? What is he after? Doesn’t such an
apparition herald some disaster? It is a very special disturbance we suffer in
the presence of someone there is no way of calling our kind.
Wherever civilized men appeared for the first time, they were regarded by
the natives as devils, as ghosts, specters. Never as living men! Unequaled
intuition, a prophetic insight, if ever there was one.
If everyone had seen through everything, if everyone had “understood,”
history would have ceased long since. But we are fundamentally,
biologically unsuited to “understand.” And even if everyone understood
except for one, history would be perpetuated because of that one, because
of his blindness. Because of a single illusion!
X maintains we are at the end of a “cosmic cycle” and that soon everything
will fall apart. And he does not doubt this for one moment.
At the same time, he is the father of a—numerous—family. With
certitudes like his, what aberration has deluded him into bringing into a
doomed world one child after the next? If we foresee the End, if we are sure
it will be coming soon, if we even anticipate it, better to do so alone. One
does not procreate on Patmos.
Montaigne, a sage, has had no posterity. Rousseau, an hysteric, still stirs
nations. I like only the thinkers who have inspired no tribune of the people.
In 1441, the Council of Florence decreed that pagans, Jews, heretics, and
schismatics will have no part in “eternal life” and that all, unless they
embrace, before dying, the true religion, will go straight to hell.
In the days when the Church professed such enormities it was truly the
Church. An institution is vital and strong only if it rejects everything which
is not itself. Unfortunately the same is true of a nation or of a regime.
A serious, honest mind understands—and can understand—nothing of
history. History in return is marvelously suited to delight an erudite cynic.
Extraordinary pleasure at the thought that, being human, one is born under
an accursed star, and that whatever one has undertaken and whatever one is
going to undertake will be fondled by mischance.
Plotinus befriended a Roman senator who had freed his slaves, renounced
his wealth, and who ate and slept at the houses of friends, for he no longer
owned anything. This senator, from the “official” point of view, was
deranged, and his case would be regarded as distressing, which indeed it
was: a saint in the Senate…. His presence, even his possibility—what an
omen! The hordes were not far….
A man who has completely vanquished selfishness, who retains no trace of
it whatever, cannot live longer than twenty-one days, according to one
modern Vedantist school. No Western moralist, not even the grimmest,
would have dared venture an observation on human nature so startling, so
revealing.
We invoke “progress” less and less and “mutation” more and more, and all
that we allege to illustrate the latter’s advantages is merely one symptom
after another of an unrivaled catastrophe.
We can breathe—and brawl—only in a corrupt regime. But we realize as
much only after having contributed to its destruction, and when nothing is
left but our capacity to regret it.
What we call the creative instinct is merely a deviation, merely a perversion
of our nature: we have not been brought into the world in order to innovate,
to revolutionize, but to enjoy our semblance of being, in order to liquidate it
quietly and to vanish afterward without a fuss.
The Aztecs were right to believe the gods must be appeased, to offer them
human blood every day in order to keep the universe from sinking back into
chaos.
We long since ceased to believe in the gods, and we no longer offer them
sacrifices. Yet the world is still here. No doubt. Only we no longer have the
good luck to know why it does not collapse on the spot.
9
We pursue whatever we pursue out of torment—a need for torment. Our
very quest for salvation is a torment, the subtlest, the best camoulaged of all
If it is true that by death we once more become what we were before being,
would it not have been tetter to abide by that pure possibility, not to stir
from it? What use was this detour, when we might have remained forever in
an unrealized plenitude?
Once my body gives me the slip, how, I wonder, with such carrion on my
hands, will I combat the capitulation of my organs?
The ancient gods ridiculed men, envied them, hunted them down on
occasion, harried them. The God of the Gospels was less mocking and less
jealous, and mortal men did not even enjoy, in their miseries, the
consolation of being able to accuse Him. Which accounts for the absence or
the impossibility of a Christian Aeschylus. A good God has killed tragedy.
Zeus deserved differently of literature.
Haunted, obsessed by abdication, as far back as I can remember. But
abdication of what? If I once longed to be “someone,” it was only for the
satisfaction of someday being able to say, like Charles V at Yuste: “I am no
longer anything.”
Some of the Provincial Letters were rewritten as many as seventeen times.
Astounding that Pascal could have expended so much time and energy
whose interest seems minimal to us now. Every polemic dates—every
polemic with men. In the Pensées, the debate was with God. This still
concerns us somewhat.
Saint Seraphim of Sarov, in his fifteen years of complete seclusion, opened
his cell door to no one, not even to the bishop who occasionally visited the
hermitage. “Silence,” he would say, “brings man closer to God and makes
him, on earth, like unto the angels.”
What the saint should have added is that silence is never deeper than in
the impossibility of prayer….
Modern man has lost the sense of fate and thereby the savor of lamentation.
In the theater we should reinstate the chorus at once, and at funerals, the
mourners….
In anxiety, a man clings to whatever can reinforce, can stimulate his
providential discomfort: to try to cure him of it is to destroy his equilibrium,
anxiety being the basis of his existence and his prosperity. The cunning
confessor knows it is necessary, knows that we cannot do without anxiety
once we have known it. Since he dares not proclaim its benefits, he employs
a detour—he vaunts remorse, an admitted, an honorable anxiety. His
customers are grateful; hence he manages to keep them readily enough,
whereas his lay colleagues struggle and grovel to keep theirs.
You once told me death did not exist. Agreed, provided you add that
nothing exists. To grant reality to anything and to deny it to what seems so
manifestly real is sheer extravagance.
When we have committed the folly of confiding a secret to someone, the
only way of being sure he will keep it to himself is to kill him on the spot.
“Sicknesses, some by day, others by night, in their fashion, visit men,
bearing suffering to mortals—in silence, for wise Zeus has denied them
speech” (Hesiod).
Fortunately, for, being mute, they are already excruciating—what would
they be if they were garrulous as well? Can we imagine even one
proclaiming itself? Instead of symptoms, declarations! Zeus, for once, has
shown signs of delicacy.
In periods of sterility, one should hibernate, sleep day and night to preserve
one’s strength, instead of wasting it in mortification and rage.
We can admire someone only if he is three-quarters irresponsible—
admiration has nothing to do with respect.
The not at all negligible advantage of having greatly hated men is that one
comes to endure them by the exhaustion of this very hatred.
Once the shutters are closed, I stretch out in the dark. The outer world, a
fading murmur, dissolves. All that is left is myself and … there’s the rub.
Hermits have spent their lives in dialogue with what was most hidden
within them. If only, following their example, I could give myself up to that
extreme exercise, in which one unites with the intimacy of one’s own being!
It is this self-interview, this inward transition which matters, and which has
no value unless continually renewed, so that the self is finally absorbed by
its essential version.
Even in God’s company, discontent was brewing, as the revolt of the angels
testifies—the first on record. Apparently on every level of creation, no one
is forgiven his superiority. We might even conceive of an envious flower.
The virtues have no face. Impersonal, abstract, conventional, they wear out
faster than the vices, which, more powerfully charged with vitality, define
themselves and become accentuated with age.
“Everything is filled with gods,” said Thaïes, at the dawn of philosophy; at
the other end, at this twilight we have come to, we can proclaim, not only
out of a need for symmetry but even more out of respect for the evidence,
that “everything is emptied of gods,” ‘
I was alone in that cemetery overlooking the village when a pregnant
woman came in. I left at once, in order not to look at this corpse-bearer at
close range, nor to ruminate upon the contrast between an aggressive womb
and the time-worn tombs—between a false promise and the end of all
promises.
The desire to pray has nothing to do with faith. It emanates from a special
despondency, and lasts as long, even while the gods and their very memory
may vanish away forever.
“No language can hope for anything but its own defeat” (Gregory Palamas).
So radical a condemnation of all literature could come only from a
mystic—from a professional of the Inexpressible.
In Antiquity, one resorted readily, especially among the philosophers, to
voluntary asphyxia—one held one’s breath until … one died. So elegant
and yet so practical a mode of being done with it has completely
disappeared, and it is anything but certain it can ever reappear.
It has been said and said again: the concept of destiny, which supposes
change, history, does not apply to an immutable being. Hence we cannot
speak of God’s “destiny.”
Doubtless we cannot, in theory. In practice, we do nothing but,
particularly in the periods when beliefs are dissolving, when faith is shaky,
when nothing seems able to withstand time, when God Himself is swept
into the general deliquescence.
Once we begin to want, we fall under the jurisdiction of the Devil.
Life is nothing; death, everything. Yet there is nothing which is death,
independent of life. It is precisely this absence of autonomous, distinct
reality which makes death universal; it has no realm of its own, it is
omnipresent, like everything which lacks identity, limit, and bearing: an
indecent infinitude.
Euphoria. Incapable of articulating my habitual moods and the reflections
they engender, impelled by some unknown power, I exulted without motive,
and it is just such jubilation, of unknown origin, I reminded myself, which
is the experience of those who do and strive, those who produce. They
neither can nor will reflect on what denies them. And if they did, it would
be of no consequence, as was the case for me that memorable day.
Why embroider upon what excludes commentary? A text explained is no
longer a text. We live with an idea, we don’t dissect it; we struggle with it,
we don’t describe the stages of the conflict. The history of philosophy is the
negation of philosophy.
A suspect scrapie led me to wonder exactly what it was by which I was
fatigued, and I began drawing up the list: though incomplete, it appeared so
long, and so depressing, that I decided to fall back on fatigue in itself a
flattering formula which, thanks to its philosophical ingredient, might
restore a plague victim.
Destruction and explosion of syntax, victory of ambiguity and
approximation. All very well. But just try to draw up a will, and you’ll see
if the defunct rigor was so contemptible.
An aphorism? Fire without flames. Understandable that no one tries to
warm himself at it.
Even if I were to lose my reason, I could never bring myself to that
“uninterrupted prayer” advocated by the Hesychasts. All I understand about
piety is its excesses, its suspect outrages, and askesis would not interest me
a moment if one did not encounter there all those things which are the lot of
the bad monk: indolence, gluttony, the thirst for desolation, greed, and
aversion for the world, vacillation between tragedy and the equivocal, hope
of an inner collapse….
I forget which Father recommends manual labor against acedia. Admirable
advice, which I have always followed spontaneously: no depression, that
secular acedia, can resist puttering.
Years now without coffee, without alcohol, without tobacco, … Luckily,
there is anxiety, which usefully replaces the strongest stimulants.
The worst reproach to be made against police states is that they oblige—for
prudence’s sake—the destruction of letters and diaries, i.e., what is least
false in literature.
To keep the mind alert, slander turns out to be as effective as disease: the
same vigilance, the same fixed attention, the same insecurity, the same
flagellating hysteria, the same mortal enrichment
I am nothing, obviously, but since for so long I wanted to be something, I
fail to smother that aspiration, that will: It exists because it has existed, it
belabors me and prevails, though I reject it. Try as I do to relegate it to my
past, it kicks up again and torments me: never having been satisfied, it has
maintained itself Intact, and has no Intention of yielding to my orders.
Caught between my will and myself, what can I do?
In bis Ladder of Paradise, Saint John Climacus notes that a proud monk has
no need to be persecuted by the Devil—he is himself his own devil.
I think of X, whose life in the monastery was a failure. No one was tetter
constituted to distinguish himself in the world and to shine there. Unsuited
to humility, to obedience, he chose solitude and bogged down in it. There
was nothing in him to become, according to the same saint’s expression,
“the lover of God.” Out of irony one can neither create one’s own salvation
nor help others create theirs; one can merely disguise one’s wounds, if not
one’s distastes.
It is a great force, and a great fortune, to be able to live without any
ambition whatever. I aspire to it, but the very fact of so aspiring still
participates in ambition.
The blank time of meditation is, in truth, the only “foil” time. We should
never blush to accumulate vacant moments—vacant in appearance, filled in
fact. To meditate is a supreme leisure, whose secret has been lost.
Noble gestures are always suspect. Each time, we regret having committed
them. Something false about them, something theatrical, attitudinizing. It is
true that we regret ignoble gestures almost as much.
If I reflect on any moment of my life, the most feverish or the most neutral,
what remains?—and what difference is there now between them?
Everything having become the same, without relief and without reality, it is
when I felt nothing that I was closest to the truth, I mean to my present state
in which I am recapitulating my experiences. What is the use of having felt
anything at all? There is no “ecstasy” which either memory or imagination
can resuscitate!
No one, before his last moment, manages to use up his death altogether:
even for the born moribund, death has a touch of novelty.
According to the Cabbala, God created souls at the beginning, and they
were all before him in the form they would later take in their incarnation.
Each soul, when its time has come, receives the order to join the body
destined for it, but each to no avail implores its Creator to spare it this
bondage and this corruption.
The more I think of what could not have failed to happen when my own
soul’s turn came, the more I realize that if there was one soul which more
than the rest must have resisted incarnation, it was mine.
We dismiss the skeptic, we speak of an “automatism of doubt,” while we
never say of a believer that he has fallen into an “automatism of faith.” Yet
faith is much more mechanical than doubt, which has the excuse of
proceeding from surprise to surprise—inside perplexity, it is true.
That faint light in each of us which dates back to before our birth, to before
all births, is what must be protected if we want to rejoin that remote glory
from which we shall never know why we were separated.
I have never known a single sensation of fulfillment, of true happiness,
without thinking that it was the moment when—now or never—I should
disappear for good.
A moment comes when it seems futile to have to choose between
metaphysics and amateurism, between the unfathomable and the anecdote.
To measure accurately the decline Christianity represents in relation to
paganism, we need merely compare the pathetic remarks of the Church
Fathers on suicide with the opinions offered on the same subject by a Pliny,
a Seneca, and even a Cicero.
What is the point of what we say? Is there any meaning to this series of
propositions which constitutes our talk? And do these propositions, taken
one by one, have any object? We can talk only if we set aside this question,
or if we raise it as infrequently as possible.
“To hell with everything’—if these words have been uttered, even only
once, coldly, with complete awareness of what they mean, history is
justified and, with it, all of us.
“Woe unto you, when all men speak well of you!” Christ was here
foretelling his own end. All men now speak well of him, even the most
hardened unbelievers—they above all. Jesus knew perfectly well that he
would one day succumb to universal approbation.
Christianity is lost if it does not suffer persecutions as pitiless as those it
was subjected to at its beginning. It must provoke enemies at all costs,
prepare great calamities for itself. Only a new Nero might still be able to
save it.
I believe speech to be a recent invention, and find it hard to imagine a
dialogue that dates back beyond ten thousand years. And even harder, a
dialogue that will occur in not ten thousand but even a thousand years from
now.
In a work of psychiatry, only the patients’ remarks interest me; in a work of
criticism, only the quotations.
No one can do anything for this Polish woman, who is beyond sickness and
health, even beyond living and dying. A phantom cannot be cured, still less
an enlightened mind. We can cure only those who belong to the earth and
still have their roots in it, however superficial.
The periods of sterility we pass through coincide with an exacerbation of
our discernment—with the eclipse of the madman in us.
To proceed to the extremities of one’s art and, even further, of one’s being:
such is the law of any man who regards himself to any degree as chosen.
It is because of speech that men give the illusion of being free. If they did—
without a word—what they do, we would take them for robots. By
speaking, they deceive themselves, as they deceive others: because they say
what they are going to do, who could suspect they are not masters of their
actions?
Deep inside, each man feels—and believes—himself to be immortal, even
if he knows he will perish the next moment. We can understand everything,
admit everything, realize everything, except our death, even when we
ponder it unremittingly and even when we are resigned to it.
In the slaughterhouse that morning, I watched the cattle being led to their
death. Almost every animal, at the last moment, refused to move forward.
To make them do so, a man hit them on the hind legs.
This scene often comes to mind when, ejected from sleep, I lack the
strength to confront the daily torture of Time.
I pride myself on my capacity to perceive the transitory character of
everything. An odd gift which has spoiled all my joys; better: all my
sensations.
Everyone expiates his first moment.
For an instant, I think I experienced what absorption into Brahma might
signify for an adept of the Vedanta. How much I longed for that instant to
be extensible—infinitely !
I sought in doubt a remedy for anxiety. The remedy ended by making
common cause with the disease.
“If a doctrine spreads, it is because heaven has so desired” (Confucius).
… As I should like to believe each time that, faced with some victorious
aberration, my rage borders on apoplexy.
The number of fanatics, extremists, and degenerates I have been able to
admire! A relief bordering on orgasm at the notion that one will never again
embrace a cause, any cause …
An acrobat? An orchestra conductor caught up by the idea? He rushes in,
then calms down, alternates the allegro with the andante, a master of
himself like the fakirs or the swindlers. While he is talking, he seems to be
seeking something, but one never knows what: an expert in the art of
counterfeiting the thinker. If he were to say a single thing that was perfectly
clear, he would be lost. Since he is as ignorant as his hearers of what he
wants to say or what he wants, he can go on for hours without exhausting
the amazement of the puppets listening to him.
A privilege to live in conflict with one’s times. At every moment one is
aware one does not think like the others. This state of acute dissimilarity,
however indigent or sterile it appears, nonetheless possesses a philosophical
status which one would be at a loss to seek in cogitations attuned to events.
“There’s no help for it,” the nonagenarian kept repeating to whatever I said,
to whatever I shouted into her ear concerning the present, the future, the
march of events….
In the hope of getting some other response from her, I went on with my
apprehensions, my grievances, my complaints. Obtaining only the
sempiternal “No help for it,” I came to the end of my patience and left,
irritated with myself, irritated with her. What folly, to confide in an idiot!
Outside, complete reversal: “But the old woman’s right. How could I fail to
realize right away that her refrain had a truth in it, doubtless the most
important truth of all, since everything that happens proclaims it and
everything in ourselves rejects it?”
10
Two kinds of intuitions: original (Homer, Upanishads, folklore) and belated
(Mahayana Buddhism, Roman stoicism, Alexandrian gnosis). First flashes
and fading glows. The wakening of consciousness and the lassitude of being
awakened.
If it is true that what perishes has never existed, birth, source of the
perishable, exists as little as the rest
Beware of euphemisms! They aggravate the horror they are supposed to
disguise. To use, as the French do, “the disappeared” instead of the
deceased or the dead man, seems to me preposterous, even insane.
When man forgets he is mortal, he feels inclined to do great things, and
sometimes succeeds. This oblivion, fruit of excess, is at the same time the
cause of his woes. “Mortal, think as a mortal.” Antiquity invented a tragic
modesty.
Of all the equestrian statues of Roman emperors, the only one to survive the
barbarian invasions and the erosion of the ages is that of Marcus Aurelius—
the least “emperor” of all and the one who would have adapted himself to
any other condition.
Getting up with my head full of plans, I would be working, I was sure of it,
all morning long. No sooner had I sat down at my desk than the odious,
vile, and persuasive refrain: “What do you expect of this world?” stopped
me short. And I returned, as usual, to my bed with the hope of finding some
answer, of going back to sleep. …
We make choices, decisions, as long as we keep to the surface of things;
once we reach the depths, we can neither choose nor decide, we can do
nothing but regret the surface….
The fear of being deceived is the vulgar version of the quest for Truth.
When you know yourself well and do not despise yourself utterly, it is
because you are too exhausted to indulge in extreme feelings.
It is a withering process to follow a doctrine, a belief, a system—for a
writer especially; unless he lives, as often happens, in contradiction with the
ideas to which he appeals. This contradiction, or this treason, stimulates him
and keeps him in a state of insecurity, embarrassment, shame—conditions
favorable to production.
Paradise was the place where everything was known but where nothing was
explained. The universe before sin—before commentary …
I have no faith, luckily. If I had, I should live in constant fear of losing it.
Hence, far from helping me, it would do nothing but injure me.
An impostor, a “humbug,” conscious of being so and therefore a selfspectator, is necessarily more advanced in knowledge than a steady mind
‘full of merits and all of a piece.
Anyone possessing a body is entitled to be called a reprobate. If he is
afflicted with a “soul” as well, there is no anathema to which he cannot lay
claim.
How are we to speak to someone who has lost everything? What language
shall we use? The most diffuse, the vaguest, will always be the most
effective.
Supremacy of regret: the actions we have not performed constitute, by the
very fact that they pursue us and that we continually think about them, the
sole contents of our consciousness.
Sometimes I wish I were a cannibal—less’for the pleasure of eating
someone than for the pleasure of vomiting him.”
No longer wanting to be a man …, dreaming of another form of failure.
Each time you find yourself at a turning-point, the best thing is to lie down
and let the hours pass. Resolutions made standing up are worthless: they are
dictated either by pride or by fear. Prone, we still know these two scourges,
but in a more attenuated, more intemporal form.
When someone complains that his life has come to nothing, we need merely
remind him that life itself is in an analogous situation, if not worse.
Works die: fragments, not having lived, cannot die either.
Horror of the accessory paralyzes me. Now, the accessory is the essence of
communication (and hence of thought), it is the flesh and blood of speech
and writing. Trying to renounce it is like fornicating with a skeleton.
The satisfaction we take from performing a task (especially when we have
no belief in the task and even disdain it) shows to what degree we still
belong to the rabble.
My merit is not to be totally ineffectual but to have wanted to be.
If I do not deny my origins, it is because it is ultimately better to be nothing
at all than a pretense of something.
A mixture of automatism and whim, man is a robot with defects, a robot out
of order. If only he remains so, and is not some day put right!
What every man, whether he has patience or not, has always expected is, of
course, death. But he knows this only when death comes …, when it is too
late to be able to enjoy it.
Man certainly began praying long before he knew how to speak, for the
pangs he must have suffered upon leaving animality, upon denying it, could
not have been endured without grunts and groans, préfigurations,
premonitory signs of prayer.
In art and in everything, the commentator is generally better informed and
more lucid than the subject of commentary. This is the advantage the
murderer has over his victim.
“Let us offer our thanks to the gods, who keep no one in this life by force.”
Seneca (whose style, according to Caligula, lacks cement) is open to the
essential, and this not so much because of his affiliation with stoicism as
because of his eight-years’ exile in Corsica, particularly desolate at the time.
This ordeal conferred upon a frivolous writer a dimension he would not
have acquired in the normal course of events; it relieved him of the aid of a
sickness.
Mine still, this moment passes by, escapes me, and is buried forever. Am I
going to commit myself with the next? I make up my mind: it is here, it
belongs to me—and already is long since past. From morning to night,
fabricating the past!
After having, to no avail, tried everything among the mystics, he had only
one recourse: to founder in wisdom….
Once you ask yourself so-called philosophical questions and employ the
inevitable jargon, you assume a superior, aggressive manner, and this in a
realm where, the insoluble being de rigueur, humility should be also. This
anomaly is merely apparent: the more formidable the questions you
confront, the more you lose your head: ultimately you bestow on yourself
the dimensions they possess. If the pride of theologians “stinks” even more
than that’of the philosophers, it is because one decs not concern oneself
with God with impunity: one reaches the point of arrogating to oneself
certain of His attributes—the worst, of course.
At peace with itself and the world, the mind atrophies. It flourishes at the
slightest contrariety. Thought is really no more than the shameless
exploitation of our embarrassments and our disgraces.
This body, once loyal, disavows me, no longer follows me, has ceased to be
my accomplice. Rejected, betrayed, discarded, what would become of me if
old infirmities, to prove their allegiance, didn’t come to keep me company
at every hour of the day and night?
“Distinguished” people do not invent in matters of language. On the
contrary, the ones who excel there are those who improvise out of
boastfulness or who wallow in a sentimental coarseness. Such men are
“natures,” they live on the level of words. Is verbal genius, then, the
concomitant of low haunts? In any case, it requires a certain minimum of
odium.
We should keep to a single language, and deepen our knowledge of it at
every opportunity. For a writer, gossiping with a concierge in his own is
much more profitable than arguing with a scholar in a foreign tongue.
“… the feeling of being everything and the evidence of being nothing.” I
happened across this phrase in my youth, and was overwhelmed by it.
Everything I felt in those days, and everything I would feel from then on,
was summed up in this eitraordinary banal formula, the synthesis of
expansion and failure, ecstasy and impasse. Most often it is not in a paradox
but in a truism that a revelation appears.
Poetry excludes calculation and premeditation: it is incompletion,
foreboding, abyss. Neither a singsong geometry, nor a succession of
bloodless adjectives. We are too deeply wounded and too despondent, too
weary and too barbarous in our weariness, to appreciate, yet, the craft.
We cannot do without the notion of progress, yet it does not deserve our
attention. It is like the “meaning” of life. Life must have one. But is there
any which does not turn out, upon examination, to be ludicrous?
Trees are massacred, houses go up—faces, faces everywhere. Man is
spreading. Man is the cancer of the earth.
There is something enveloping and voluptuous about the notion of fatality:
it keeps you warm.
A troglodyte that will have passed through all the nuances of satiety….
The pleasure of slandering yourself greatly exceeds that of being slandered.
Better than anyone I know the danger of being born with a thirst for
everything. A poisoned gift, a vengeance of Providence. Thus encumbered,
I could get nowhere, on the spiritual level, of course, the only one that
matters. Anything but accidental, my failure is identified with my essence.
The mystics and their “collected works.” When one addresses oneself to
God, and to God alone, as they claim to do, one should be careful not to
write. God doesn’t read….
Each time I think of the Essential, I seem to glimpse it in silence or
explosion, in stupor or exclamation. Never in speech.
When you meditate all day on the inopportuneness of birth, everything you
plan and everything you perform seems pathetic, futile. You are like a
madman who, cured, does nothing but think of the crisis from which he has
emerged, the “dream” he has left behind; he keeps harking back to it, so that
his cure is of no benefit to him whatever.
The appetite for torment is for some what the lure of gain is for others.
Man started out on the wrong foot. The misadventure in Paradise was the
first consequence. The rest had to follow.
I shall never understand how we can live knowing that we are not—to say
the least!—eternal.
The ideal being? An angel ravaged by humor.
When, after a series of questions about desire, disgust, and serenity, Buddha
was asked: “What is the goal, the final meaning of nirvana?” he did not
answer. He smiled. There has been a great deal of commentary on that
smile, instead of seeing it as a normal reaction to a pointless question. It is
what we do when confronted by a child’s why. We smile, because no answer
is conceivable, because the answer would be even more meaningless than
the question. Children admit no limits to anything; they always want to see
beyond, to see what there is afterward. But there is no afterward. Nirvana is
a limit, the limit It is Iteration, supreme impasse….
Existence might well have had some attraction before the advent of noise—
let us say, before the neolithic age. When will he come, the man who can rid
us of all men?
For all we tell ourselves’ about not outliving a stillborn babe, instead of
clearing out at the first opportunity, we cling, with lunatic energy, to one
day more.
Lucidity docs not extirpate the desire to live—far from it, lucidity merely
makes us unsuited to life.
God: a disease we imagine we are cured of because no one dies of it
nowadays.
Unconsciousness is the secret, the “vital principle” of life…. It is the sole
recourse against the self, against the disease of being individualized, against
the debilitating effect of the state of consciousness, a state so formidable, so
demanding, that it must be reserved for athletes alone.
Any success, in any realm, involves an inner impoverishment It makes us
forget what we are, it deprives us of the torment of our limits.
I have never taken myself for a being. A non-citizen, a marginal type, a
nothing who exists only by the excess, by the superabundance of his
nothingness.
To have foundered somewhere between the epigram and the sigh!
Suffering opens our eyes, helps us to see what we would not have seen
otherwise. Hence it is useful only to knowledge and, except for that, serves
only to poison existence. Which, one may add in passing, favors knowledge
further. “He has suffered—hence he has understood.” This is all we can say
of a victim of disease, injustice, or of any kind of misfortune. Suffering
improves no one (except those who were already good), it is forgotten as all
things are forgotten, it does not enter into “humanity’s patrimony” nor
preserve itself in any way at all—it wastes itself as everything is wasted.
Once again, it serves only to open our eyes.
Man has said what he had to say. He should rest now. But refuses, and
though he has entered into his “survivor” phase, he fidgets as if he were on
the threshold of an astonishing career.
A cry means something only in a created universe. If there is no creator,
what is the good of calling attention to yourself?
Nerval: “Having reached the Place de la Concorde, my thought was to kill
myself” Nothing in all French literature has haunted me as much as that.
In everything, only the beginning and the outcome matter, doing and
undoing. The way toward being and the way out of being—that is
breathing, whereas being as such is merely an asphyxiator.
With the passage of time, I am convinced that my first years were a
paradise. But I am undoubtedly mistaken. If there was ever a paradise, I
must look for it earlier than all my years.
A golden rule: to leave an incomplete image of oneself …
The more man is man, the more he loses in reality: it is the price he must
pay for his distinct essence. If he managed to achieve the limits of his
singularity, if he were to become man totally, absolutely, there would no
longer be anything in him which would suggest any kind of existence at all.
Silence in the face of the decrees of fate, the rediscovery, after centuries of
thundering prayer, of the ancient Be still—there is our aspiration, there our
struggle, if such a word is appropriate to a foreseen and accepted defeat.
Every success is ignominious; we never get over it—in our own eyes, of
course.
The pangs of truth about ourselves are more than we can endure. How
pitiable the man (if such a being exists) who no longer lies to himself!
I shall no longer read the sages—they have done me too much harm. I
should have surrendered to my instincts, let my madness flourish. I have
done just the opposite, I have put on the mask of reason, and the mask has
ended by replacing my face and usurping all the rest.
In my moments of megalomania, I tell myself that it is impossible my
diagnoses should be mistaken, that I have only to be patient, to wait until
the end, until the advent of the last man, the one being in a position to
substantiate me….
The notion that it would have been better never to exist is among those
which meet with the most opposition. Every man, incapable of seeing
himself except from inside, regards himself as necessary, even
indispensable, every man feels and perceives himself as an absolute reality,
as a whole, as the whole. The moment we identify ourselves entirely with
our own being, we react like God, we are God.
It is only when we live at once within and on the margins of ourselves that
we can conceive, quite calmly, that it would have been preferable that the
accident we are should never have occurred.
If I followed my natural inclination, I should blow up the world. And it is
because I lack the courage to follow it that, out of penitence, I try to stupefy
myself with the company of those who have found peace.
A writer has left his mark on us not because we have read him a great deal
but because we have thought of him more than is warranted. I have not
frequented Baudelaire or Pascal particularly, but I have not stopped thinking
of their miseries, which have accompanied me everywhere as faithfully as
my own.
At each age, more or less distinct signs warn us that it is time to decamp.
We hesitate, we procrastinate, convinced that, once old age has come at last,
these signs will become so clear that any further vacillation would be
unsuitable. Clear they are, indeed, but we lack sufficient vigor to perform
the one decent action a living man can commit.
Our physiological miseries help us to envisage the future with some
confidence: they dispense us from tormenting ourselves overmuch, they do
their test so that none of our long-range projects has time to wear out all our
available energies.
The Empire was falling, the Barbarians were on the move…. What was to
be done, except to escape the age? Happy moment, when there was still
somewhere to go, when the empty places were accessible and welcoming!
We have been dispossessed of everything, even the desert.
For the man who has got in the nasty habit of unmasking appearances, event
and misunderstanding are synonyms. To make for the essential is to throw
up the game, to admit one is defeated.
X is undoubtedly right to compare himself to a “volcano,” but wrong to go
into details.
The poor, by thinking unceasingly of money, reach the point of losing the
spiritual advantages of non-possession, thereby sinking as low as the rich.
The early Greeks regarded the psyche as no more than air, wind, or at test
smoke, and one readily agrees with them every time one wearies of
foraging in one’s own ego or that of others, searching for strange and, if
possible, suspect depths.
The final step toward indifference is the destruction of the very notion of
indifference.
Walking in a forest between two hedges of ferns transfigured by autumn—
that is a triumph. What are ovations and applause beside it?
To deprecate your own kind, to vilify and pulverize them, to attack their
foundations, to undermine your very basis, to destroy your point of
departure, to punish your origins …, to curse all those non-elect, lesser
breeds, torn between imposture and elegy, whose sole mission is not to have
one …
Having destroyed all my connections, burned my bridges, I should feel a
certain freedom, and in fact I do, one so intense I am afraid to rejoice in it.
When the habit of seeing things as they are turns into a mania, we lament
the madman we have been and are no longer.
11
Someone we regard highly comes closer to us when he performs an action
unworthy of him—thereby he releases us from the calvary of veneration.
And starting from that moment we feel a true attachment to him.
Nothing is worse than the coarseness and meanness we perpetrate out of
timidity.
Faced with the Nile and the Pyramids, Flaubert thought of nothing but
Normandy, according to one witness—nothing but the landscapes and
manners of the future Madame Bovary. Nothing but that seemed to exist for
him. To imagine is to limit oneself, to exclude: without an excessive
capacity for rejection, no plan, no work, no way of realizing anything.
What in any way resembles a victory seems to me so dishonorable that i can
do battle, in whatever circumstance, only with the firm intention of gaining
the under hand. I have passed the stage where beings matter, and I see no
reason to struggle in known worlds.
Philosophy is taught only in the agora, in a garden, or at home. The lecture
chair is the grave of philosophy, the death of any living thought, the dais is
the mind in mourning.
That I can still desire proves that I lack an exact perception of reality, that I
am distracted, that I am a thousand miles from the Truth. “Man,” we read in
the Dhammapada, “is prey to desire only because he does not see things as
they are.”
I was shaking with rage: my honor was at stake. The hours passed, dawn
was approaching. Was I going to ruin my night because of a trifle? Try as I
would to minimize the incident, the reasons I invented to calm myself
remained ineffectual. That anyone would dare do such a thing to me! I was
on the point of opening the window and screaming like a madman, when
the image of our planet spinning like a top suddenly seized my mind. My
anger subsided at once.
Death is not altogether useless: after all, it is because of death that we may
be able to recuperate the prenatal space, our only space….
How right it was to begin the day, as men once did, with a prayer, a call for
help! Ignorant of whom to address ourselves to, we will end by groveling
before the first cracked god to come along.
Acute consciousness of having a body—that is the absence of health….
Which is as much as to say that I have never been well
Everything is deception—I’ve always known that Yet this certitude has
afforded me no relief, except at the moments when it was violently present
to my mind….
The perception of the Precarious raised to the level of vision, of mystical
experience.
The only way of enduring one disaster after the next is to love the very idea
of disaster: if we succeed, there are no further surprises, we are superior to
whatever occurs, we are invincible victims.
In very powerful sensations of pain, much more than in very slight ones, we
observe ourselves, we divide into an external witness and the moaning,
screaming sufferer. Everything which borders on torment wakens the
psychologist in each of us, as well as the experimenter: we want to see how
fer we can go in the intolerable.
What is injustice compared to disease? True, we may find it unjust to be
sick. Moreover that is how each of us reacts, without troubling as to
whether he is right or wrong. Sickness is: nothing more real than disease. If
we call it unjust, we must dare to do as much with Being itself—we must
speak, then, of the injustice of existing.
The Creation, as it was, amounted to little enough; tinkered with, it was
worth still less. If only it had teen left to Its truth, Its primal nullity! The
Messiah to come—the real one—is understandably slow about putting in an
appearance. The task that awaits him is not going to te an easy one: how
will he manage to deliver humanity from the mania of amelioration?
When, getting too used to ourselves, we begin to loathe ourselves, we soon
realize that we are worse off, that self hatred actually strengthens self
attachment
I do not interrupt him, I let him weigh each man’s merits, waiting for him to
tell me off…. His Incomprehension of others is astounding. Subtle and
ingenuous both, he judges you as if you were an entity or a category. Time
having had no hold over him, he cannot admit that I am outside of whatever
he forbids, that nothing of what he favors still concerns me. Dialogue
becomes pointless with someone who escapes the procession of the years. I
ask those I love to be kind enough to grow old.
Panic in the face of anything—of presence, of the void, of anything.
Original panic.
God is, even if He isn’t.
D is incapable of assimilating Evil. He acknowledges its existence, but
cannot incorporate it into his mind. If he were to emerge from hell he would
be oblivious of his whereabouts, so remote is he in his thinking from what
falls afoul…. Not the faintest trace of all he has endured in his ideas.
Occasionally he has reflexes—no more than that—the reflexes of a
wounded man. Closed to the negative, he does not discern that all we
possess is merely a capital of non-being. Yet more than one of his gestures
reveals a demonic spirit—demonic unawares. He is a destroyer obscured
and sterilized by Good.
Curiosity to measure our progress into failure is the only reason we have to
grow older. Wc thought we had reached the limit, we thought the horizon
was blocked forever, we lamented in the thrall of our discouragement And
now we realize that we can fall still lower, that there is something new, that
all hope is not lost, that it is possible to sink a little further and thus to
postpone the danger of getting stuck, even paralyzed….
“Life seems good only to the madman,” observed Hegesias, a Cyrcnaic
philosopher, some twenty-three centuries ago. These are almost the only
words of his we have…. Of all oeuvres to reinvent, his comes first on my
list.
No one approaches the condition of a sage if he has not had the good luck
to be forgotten in his lifetime.
To think is to undermine—to undermine oneself. Action involves fewer
risks, for it fills the interval between things and ourselves, whereas
reflection dangerously widens it.
… So long as I give myself up to physical exercise, manual labor, I am
happy, fulfilled; once I stop, I am seized by dizziness, and I can think of
nothing but giving up for good.
At the lowest point of ourselves, when we touch bottom and feel the abyss,
we are suddenly raised up—defense-reaction or absurd pride—by the sense
of being superior to God. The grandiose and impure aspect of the
temptation to be done with it all.
A broadcast about wolves, with recordings of their howls. What a language!
The most heartrending I know, and I shall never forget it. From now on, in
moments of excessive solitude, I need merely recall those sounds to have
the sense of belonging to a community.
From the moment defeat was in sight, Hitler spoke of nothing but victory.
He believed in it—he behaved, in any case, as if he believed in it—and
remained to the end walled up in his optimism, his faith. Everything was
crumbling around him, every day belied his hopes but, persisting in his trust
in the impossible, blinding himself as only the incurable can, he had the
strength to go on to the end, to invent one horror after the next, and to
continue beyond his madness, even beyond his destiny. Which is why we
can say of him—of the man who failed so utterly—that he realized himself
better than any other mortal.
“Aprà moi le déluge” is the unavowed motto of every person: if we admit
that others survive us, it is in the hope that they will be punished for it.
A zoologist who observed gorillas in their native habitat was amazed by the
uniformity of their life and their vast idleness. Hours and hours without
doing anything … Was boredom unknown to them?
This is indeed a question raised by a human, a busy ape. Far from fleeing
monotony, animals crave it, and what they most dread is to see it end. For it
ends only to be replaced by fear, the cause of all activity.
Inaction is divine; yet it is against inaction that man has rebelled. Man
alone, in nature, is incapable of enduring monotony, man alone wants
something to happen at all costs—something, anything…. Thereby he
shows himself unworthy of his ancestor: the need for novelty is the
characteristic of an alienated gorilla.
We come closer and closer to the Unbreathable. When we have reached it,
that will be the great Day. Alas, we are only on the eve. …
A nation achieves and retains pre-eminence as long as it accepts
conventions which are necessarily clumsy, as long as it is given over to
prejudices without regarding them as such. Once it calls them by their
name, everything is unmasked, everything is compromised.
To seek to rule, to take a role, to make the law—such things cannot be
done without a powerful dose of stupidity: history, in its essence, is stupid.
… It continues, it advances, because the nations liquidate their prejudices
one after the other. If they were to be rid of them all at the same time, there
would be nothing left but a blessed universal disintegration.
One cannot live without motives. I have no motives left, and I am living.
I was in perfect health, I felt better than ever. Suddenly I was cold, so cold
that I was sure there was no cure for it. What was happening to me? Yet this
was not the first time I had been in the grip of such a sensation. But in the
past I had endured it without trying to understand. This time I wanted to
know, and now. … I abandoned one hypothesis after the next: it could not
be sickness; not the shadow of a symptom to cling to. What was I to do? I
was baffled, incapable of finding even the trace of an explanation, when an
idea occurred to me—and this was a real relief—that what I was feeling
was merely a version of the great, final cold—that it was simply death
exercising, rehearsing….
In paradise, objects and beings, assaulted by light from all sides, cast no
shadow. Which is to say that they lack reality, like anything that is
unbroached by darkness and deserted by death.
Our first intuitions are the true ones. What I thought of so many things in
my first youth seems to me Increasingly right, and after so many detours
and distractions, I now come back to it, aggrieved that I could have erected
my existence on the ruin of those revelations.
I remember a place I have been only if I have had the luck to experience
utter misery there.
At the street fair, watching a tumbler grimacing, shouting, exhausting
himself, I told myself that he was doing his duty, whereas I was evading
mine….
To manifest oneself, to produce in any realm is the characteristic of a more
or less camouflaged fanatic. If we do not regard ourselves as entrusted with
a mission, existence is difficult; action, impossible.
The certitude that there is no salvation is a form of salvation, in fact it is
salvation. Starting from here, we might organize our own life as well as
construct a philosophy of history: the insoluble as solution, as the only way
out….
My weaknesses have spoiled my existence, but it is thanks to them that I
exist, that I imagine I exist.
Man interests me only since he has ceased to believe in himself. While he
was in his ascending phase, he deserved no more than indifference. Now he
provokes a new sentiment, a special sympathy: compassionate horror.
For all the superstitions and shackles I have rid myself of, I cannot regard
myself as a free man, remote from everything. A mania for desistance,
having survived the other passions, refuses to leave me: it torments me, it
perseveres, it demands that I continue renouncing, withdrawing. But from
what? What is left to reject? I ponder the question. My role is over, my
career finished, and yet nothing has changed in my life, I am at the same
point in it, I must still desist, still and forever.
12
No position is so false as having understood and still remaining alive.
When we consider coldly that portion of duration granted to each of us, it
seems equally satisfactory and equally ludicrous, whether it lasts a day or a
century.
“I’ve had my time”—no expression can be uttered more appropriately at
any moment of life, including the first.
Death is the providence of those who will have had the taste and the talent
for fiasco—the recompense of all who have come to nothing, who wanted
not to…. It warrants them, it is their way of winning. On the other hand, for
the others, those who have labored to succeed, and who have succeeded:
what a denial, what a slap in the face!
An Egyptian monk, after fifteen years of complete solitude, received a
packet of letters from his family and friends. He did not open them, he
flung them into the fire in order to escape the assault of memory. We cannot
sustain communion with oursclf and our thoughts if we allow ghosts to
appear, to prevail. The desert signifies not so much a new life as the death
of the past: at last we have escaped our own history. In society, no less than
in the Thebaid, the letters we write, and those we receive, testify to the fact
that we are in chains, that we have broken none of the bonds, that we are
merely slaves and deserve to be so.
A little patience and the moment will come when nothing more will be
possible, when humanity, thrown back on itself, cannot take a single step in
any direction. Though we may manage a general sense of this
unprecedented spectacle, we should like details. … And we are afraid we
will miss the festivities, not being young enough to have the luck to attend.
Whether it is spoken by a grocer or a philosopher, the word being,
apparently so rich, so tempting, so charged with significance, in fact means
nothing at all; incredible that a man in his right mind can use it on any
occasion whatever.
Getting up in the middle of the night, I walked around my room with the
certainty of being chosen and criminal, a double privilege natural to the
sleepless, revolting or incomprehensible for the captives of daytime logic.
It is not given to everyone to have had an unhappy childhood. Mine was
much more than happy—it was crowned. I cannot find a better adjective to
designate what was triumphant about even its pangs. That had to be paid
for, that could not go unpunished.
If I am so fond of Dostoevsky’s correspondence, It Is because he speaks in
it of nothing but sickness and money, the only “burning” subjects. All the
rest is merely flourishes and chaff.
In five hundred thousand years, it appears that England will be entirely
submerged. If I were an Englishman I should lay down my arms at once.
Each of us has his unit of time. For one it is the day, the week, the month,
or the year; for another, it is a decade, or a century…. These units, still on
the human scale, are compatible with any plan, any task.
There are some, however, who take time itself for their unit, and
sometimes raise themselves above it: for them, what task, what plan
deserves to be taken seriously? A man who sees too far, who is
contemporary with the whole future, can no longer act or even move….
An obsession with the precarious accompanies me in every circumstance:
mailing a letter this morning, I told myself it was addressed to a mortal.
One absolute experience, apropos of anything, and you seem, in your own
eyes, a survivor.
I have always lived with the awareness of the impossibility of living. And
what has made existence endurable to me is my curiosity as to howl would
get from one minute, one day, one year to the next.
The first condition for becoming a saint is to love bores, to endure visits….
To shake people up, to wake them from their sleep, while knowing you are
committing a crime and that it would te a thousand times tetter to leave
them alone, since when they wake, too, you have nothing to offer them….
Port-Royal. In that green vale, so many conflicts and lacerations on account
of a few bagatelles! Any belief, after a certain time, seems gratuitous and
incomprehensible, as does the counter-belief which has destroyed it. Only
the stupefaction which both provoke remains.
A poor wretch who feels time, who is its victim, its martyr, who experiences
nothing else, who is time at each moment, knows what a metaphysician or a
poet divines only by grace of a collapse or a miracle.
Those inner rumblings which come to nothing, and by which we are
reduced to the state of a grotesque volcano.
Each time I am gripped by a fit of rage, I begin by being aggrieved and
disgusted, then I teil myself: what luck, what a windfall! I am still alive, I
am still one of those flesh-and-blood ghosts, …
There was no end to the telegram I had just received. All my pretentions, all
my inadequacies were in it. Certain failings I myself scarcely suspected
were revealed, were proclaimed! What prescience, and what detail! At the
end of the interminable indictment, no clue, no trace that permitted me to
identify the sender. Who could it be? And why this haste, this unaccustomed
means of communication? Who ever spoke his mind with such rigor in his
grievance? Where did he come from, this omniscient judge who dared not
name himself, this coward in possession of all my secrets, this inquisitor
who allowed no extenuating circumstances, not even the ones granted by
the most hardened torturers? I too might have made a misstep or two, I too
am entitled to some indulgence. I cringe before the inventory of my defects,
I choke, I cannot bear this procession of truths…. Cursed telegram—I tear it
up, and awaken….
To have opinions is inevitable, is natural; to have convictions is less so.
Each time I meet someone who has convictions, I wonder what intellectual
vice, what flaw has caused him to acquire such a thing. However legitimate
this question, my habit of raising it spoils the pleasure of conversation for
me, gives me a bad conscience, makes me hateful in my own eyes.
Once upon a time writing seemed important to me. Of all my superstitions,
this one seems the most compromising and the most incomprehensible.
I have abused the word disgust. But what other can I use to indicate a state
in which exasperation is continually corrected by lassitude, and lassitude by
exasperation?
All evening, having tried to define him, we reviewed all the euphemisms
which allow us not to pronounce, in his regard, the word perfidy. He is not
perfidious, he is merely tortuous, diabolically tortuous, and at the same time
innocent, naïve, even angelic. Imagine, if you can, a mixture of Aliosha and
Smerdyakov.
When you no longer believe in yourself, you stop producing or struggling,
you even stop raising questions or answering them, whereas it is the
contrary which should have occurred, since it is precisely at this moment
that, being free of all bonds, you are likely to grasp the truth, discern what
is real and what is not. But once your belief in your own role, or your own
lot, has dried up, you become incurious about everything else, even the
“truth,” though you are closer to it than ever before.
In Paradise, I would not last a “season” or even a day; then how account for
my nostalgia for it? I don’t account for it, it has inhabited me always, it was
part of me before I was.
Anyone may now and then have the sense of occupying only a point and a
moment; to have such a sense day and night, hour by hour, is less frequent,
and it is from this experience, this datum, that one turns toward nirvana or
sarcasm—or toward both at once.
Although I have sworn never to sin against blessed concision, I am still in
complicity with words, and if I am seduced by silence I dare not enter it, I
merely prowl on its peripheries.
We should establish a religion’s degree of truth according to what it makes
of the Devil: the more eminent the rank it accords him, the more it testifies
that it is concerned with reality, that it rejects deceit and lies, that it is
serious, that it sets more store by verification than by distraction or
consolation.
Nothing deserves to be undone, doubtless because nothing deserved to be
done. Hence we become detached from everything, from the original as
well as from the ultimate, from advent as well as from collapse.
We know, we feel that everything has been said, that there is nothing left to
say. But we feel less that this truth affords language a strange, even
unsettling status which redeems it. Words are ultimately saved because they
have ceased living.
The enormous good and the enormous harm I have drawn from my
ruminations on the’condition of the dead.
The undeniable advantage of growing old is to be able to observe at close
range the slow and methodical degradation of our organs; they are all
beginning to go, some obviously, others discreetly. They become detached
from the body, as the body becomes detached from us: it escapes us, flees
us, no longer belongs to us. It is a traitor we cannot even denounce, since it
stops nowhere and puts itself in no one’s service.
I never tire of reading about the hermits, preferably about those said to be
“weary of seeking God.” I am dazzled by the failures of the Desert.
If, somehow, Rimbaud had been able to go on (as likely as imagining the
day after the apocalypse, or a Nietzsche scribbling away after Ecce Homo),
he would have ended by reining in, calming down, by glossing his own
explosions, explicating them—and himself. A sacrilege in every case,
excess of consciousness being only a form of profanation.
I have followed only one idea all the way—the idea that everything man
achieves necessarily turns against him. The idea is not a new one, but I have
lived it with a power of conviction, a desperation which no fanaticism, no
delirium has ever approached. There is no martyrdom, no dishonor I would
not suffer for it, and I would exchange it for no other truth, no other
revelation.
To go still further than Buddha, to raise oneself above nirvana, to learn to
do without it …, to be stopped by nothing, not even by the notion of
deliverance, regarding it as a mere way-station, an embarrassment, an
eclipse …
My weakness for doomed dynasties, for decaying empires, for the
Montezumas of forever, for those who believe in signs, for the lacerated and
pursued, for the drunkards of the ineluctable, for the jeopardized, the
devoured, for all who are waiting for their executioner …
I pass without stopping at the grave of that critic whose vitriolic remarks I
have so often pondered. Nor at the grave of the poet who spent his life
dreaming of his ultimate dissolution. Other names pursue me, alien names
linked to a pitiless and pacifying wisdom, to a vision calculated to free the
mind from all obsessions, even funereal ones. Nagarjuna, Chandrakirti,
Santideva—unparalleled swashbucklers, dialecticians belabored by the
obsession of salvation, acrobats and apostles of Vacuity for whom, sages
among the sages, the universe was only a word….
No matter how many autumns I observe the spectacle of these leaves so
eager to fall, it still surprises me each time—a surprise in which “a chill
down the spine” would prevail were it not for the last-minute explosion of a
gaiety whose origin I cannot account for.
There are certain moments when, remote as we are from any faith, we can
conceive of only God as our interlocutor. To address ourselves elsewhere
seems an impossibility, a madness. Solitude, in its extreme reaches, requires
a form of conversation, also extreme.
Man gives off a special odor: of all the animals, he alone smells of the
corpse.
The hours would not pass; dawn seemed remote, inconceivable. Actually it
was not dawn I was waiting for but oblivion of those refractory hours which
refused to stir. Lucky the man condemned to death, I told myself, who on
the eve of his execution is at least sure of having one good night!
Will I be able to stand another minute? will I collapse? If there is one
interesting sensation, it is the one which gives us the foretaste of epilepsy.
A man who survives himself despises himself without acknowledging as
much, sometimes without even knowing as much.
When you live past the age of rebellion, and you still rebel, you seem to
yourself a kind of senile Lucifer.
If we did not tear the stigmata of life, how easy it would be to steal away,
and how well everything would go by itself!
Better than anyone I am able to forgive on the spot. My desire for revenge
comes late, too late, when memory of the offense is fading and when, the
incitation to action having become virtually nonexistent, I have only one
recourse: to deplore my “good feelings.”
Only to the degree that our moments afford us some contact with death do
we have some chance to glimpse on what insanity all existence is based.
Ultimately, it is entirely a matter of indifference whether we are something,
even if we are God. On this, with a little pressure, almost everyone might be
brought to agree. But how does it happen then that everyone aspires to
further life, to additional being, and that there is no one who strives to sink,
to descend toward the ideal default?
According to a belief rather widespread among certain tribes, the dead
speak the same language as the living, except that for them words have a
meaning contrary to the one they had: large means small, near far, black
white….
Does dying come down to that? Still, better than any funereal invention,
this complete reversal of language indicates what is unwonted,
dumbfounding about death….
I am perfectly willing to believe in man’s future, but how is one to manage
it when still, after all, in possession of one’s faculties? It would take their
virtually complete collapse, and even then …!
A thought which is not secretly stamped by fatality is interchangeable,
worthless, is merely thought….
In Turin, at the beginning of his madness, Nietzsche would rush to his
mirror, look at himself, turn away, look again. In the train that was taking
him to Basel, the one thing he always asked for was a mirror. He no longer
knew who he was, kept looking for himself, and this man, so eager to
protect his identity, so thirsty for himself, had no instrument at hand but the
clumsiest, the most lamentable of expedients.
No one more useless, and more unusable, than I: a datum I must quite
simply accept, without taking any pride in the fact whatever. So long as this
is not the case, the consciousness of my usclessness will serve for nothing.
Whatever the nightmare, one takes a role in it, one is the protagonist, one is
something. It is at night that the disinherited man triumphs. If we were to
suppress bad dreams, there would be mass revolutions.
Terror of the future is always grafted onto the desire to experience that
terror.
Suddenly I was alone with … I felt, that afternoon of my childhood, that a
very serious event had just occurred. It was my first awakening, the first
indication, the premonitory sign of consciousness. Before that I had been
only a being. From that moment, I was more and less than that. Each begins
with a rift and a revelation.
Birth and chain are synonyms. To see the light of day, to see shackles …
To say “Everything is illusory” is to court illusion, to accord it a high
degree of reality, the highest in fact, whereas on the contrary one wanted to
discredit it. The solution? To stop proclaiming or denouncing it, serving it
by thinking about it. The very idea that disqualifies all ideas is a fetter.
If we could sleep twenty-four hours a day, we would soon return to the
primordial slime, the beatitude of that perfect torpor before Genesis—the
dream of every consciousness sick of itself.
Not to be born is undoubtedly the best plan of all. Unfortunately it is within
no one’s reach.
No one has loved this world more than I, and yet if it had been offered to
me, even as a child, on a platter, I should have shrieked, “Too late, too
late!”
“What’s wrong—what’s the matter with you?” Nothing, nothing’s the
matter, I’ve merely taken a leap outside my fate, and now I don’t know
where to turn, what to run for….