## FIRST BOOK: UTILITARIANISM

There are few circumstances among those which make up the present
condition of human knowledge, more unlike what might have been expected,
or more significant of the backward state in which speculation on the
most important subjects still lingers, than the little progress which
has been made in the decision of the controversy respecting the
criterion of right and wrong. From the dawn of philosophy, the question
concerning the _summum bonum_, or, what is the same thing, concerning
the foundation of morality, has been accounted the main problem in
speculative thought, has occupied the most gifted intellects, and
divided them into sects and schools, carrying on a vigorous warfare
against one another. And after more than two thousand years the same
discussions continue, philosophers are still ranged under the same
contending banners, and neither thinkers nor mankind at large seem
nearer to being unanimous on the subject, than when the youth Socrates
listened to the old Protagoras, and asserted (if Plato's dialogue be
grounded on a real conversation) the theory of utilitarianism against
the popular morality of the so-called sophist.
It is true that similar confusion and uncertainty, and in some cases
similar discordance, exist respecting the first principles of all the
sciences, not excepting that which is deemed the most certain of them,
mathematics; without much impairing, generally indeed without impairing
at all, the trustworthiness of the conclusions of those sciences. An
apparent anomaly, the explanation of which is, that the detailed
doctrines of a science are not usually deduced from, nor depend for
their evidence upon, what are called its first principles. Were it not
so, there would be no science more precarious, or whose conclusions were
more insufficiently made out, than algebra; which derives none of its
certainty from what are commonly taught to learners as its elements,
since these, as laid down by some of its most eminent teachers, are as
full of fictions as English law, and of mysteries as theology. The
truths which are ultimately accepted as the first principles of a
science, are really the last results of metaphysical analysis, practised
on the elementary notions with which the science is conversant; and
their relation to the science is not that of foundations to an edifice,
but of roots to a tree, which may perform their office equally well
though they be never dug down to and exposed to light. But though in
science the particular truths precede the general theory, the contrary
might be expected to be the case with a practical art, such as morals or
legislation. All action is for the sake of some end, and rules of
action, it seems natural to suppose, must take their whole character
and colour from the end to which they are subservient. When we engage in
a pursuit, a clear and precise conception of what we are pursuing would
seem to be the first thing we need, instead of the last we are to look
forward to. A test of right and wrong must be the means, one would
think, of ascertaining what is right or wrong, and not a consequence of
having already ascertained it.
The difficulty is not avoided by having recourse to the popular theory
of a natural faculty, a sense or instinct, informing us of right and
wrong. For--besides that the existence of such a moral instinct is
itself one of the matters in dispute--those believers in it who have any
pretensions to philosophy, have been obliged to abandon the idea that it
discerns what is right or wrong in the particular case in hand, as our
other senses discern the sight or sound actually present. Our moral
faculty, according to all those of its interpreters who are entitled to
the name of thinkers, supplies us only with the general principles of
moral judgments; it is a branch of our reason, not of our sensitive
faculty; and must be looked to for the abstract doctrines of morality,
not for perception of it in the concrete. The intuitive, no less than
what may be termed the inductive, school of ethics, insists on the
necessity of general laws. They both agree that the morality of an
individual action is not a question of direct perception, but of the
application of a law to an individual case. They recognise also, to a
great extent, the same moral laws; but differ as to their evidence, and
the source from which they derive their authority. According to the one
opinion, the principles of morals are evident _à priori_, requiring
nothing to command assent, except that the meaning of the terms be
understood. According to the other doctrine, right and wrong, as well as
truth and falsehood, are questions of observation and experience. But
both hold equally that morality must be deduced from principles; and the
intuitive school affirm as strongly as the inductive, that there is a
science of morals. Yet they seldom attempt to make out a list of the _à
priori_ principles which are to serve as the premises of the science;
still more rarely do they make any effort to reduce those various
principles to one first principle, or common ground of obligation. They
either assume the ordinary precepts of morals as of _à priori_
authority, or they lay down as the common groundwork of those maxims,
some generality much less obviously authoritative than the maxims
themselves, and which has never succeeded in gaining popular acceptance.
Yet to support their pretensions there ought either to be some one
fundamental principle or law, at the root of all morality, or if there
be several, there should be a determinate order of precedence among
them; and the one principle, or the rule for deciding between the
various principles when they conflict, ought to be self-evident.
To inquire how far the bad effects of this deficiency have been
mitigated in practice, or to what extent the moral beliefs of mankind
have been vitiated or made uncertain by the absence of any distinct
recognition of an ultimate standard, would imply a complete survey and
criticism of past and present ethical doctrine. It would, however, be
easy to show that whatever steadiness or consistency these moral beliefs
have attained, has been mainly due to the tacit influence of a standard
not recognised. Although the non-existence of an acknowledged first
principle has made ethics not so much a guide as a consecration of men's
actual sentiments, still, as men's sentiments, both of favour and of
aversion, are greatly influenced by what they suppose to be the effects
of things upon their happiness, the principle of utility, or as Bentham
latterly called it, the greatest happiness principle, has had a large
share in forming the moral doctrines even of those who most scornfully
reject its authority. Nor is there any school of thought which refuses
to admit that the influence of actions on happiness is a most material
and even predominant consideration in many of the details of morals,
however unwilling to acknowledge it as the fundamental principle of
morality, and the source of moral obligation. I might go much further,
and say that to all those _à priori_ moralists who deem it necessary to
argue at all, utilitarian arguments are indispensable. It is not my
present purpose to criticise these thinkers; but I cannot help
referring, for illustration, to a systematic treatise by one of the most
illustrious of them, the _Metaphysics of Ethics_, by Kant. This
remarkable man, whose system of thought will long remain one of the
landmarks in the history of philosophical speculation, does, in the
treatise in question, lay down an universal first principle as the
origin and ground of moral obligation; it is this:--'So act, that the
rule on which thou actest would admit of being adopted as a law by all
rational beings.' But when he begins to deduce from this precept any of
the actual duties of morality, he fails, almost grotesquely, to show
that there would be any contradiction, any logical (not to say
physical) impossibility, in the adoption by all rational beings of the
most outrageously immoral rules of conduct. All he shows is that the
_consequences_ of their universal adoption would be such as no one would
choose to incur.
On the present occasion, I shall, without further discussion of the
other theories, attempt to contribute something towards the
understanding and appreciation of the Utilitarian or Happiness theory,
and towards such proof as it is susceptible of. It is evident that this
cannot be proof in the ordinary and popular meaning of the term.
Questions of ultimate ends are not amenable to direct proof. Whatever
can be proved to be good, must be so by being shown to be a means to
something admitted to be good without proof. The medical art is proved
to be good, by its conducing to health; but how is it possible to prove
that health is good? The art of music is good, for the reason, among
others, that it produces pleasure; but what proof is it possible to give
that pleasure is good? If, then, it is asserted that there is a
comprehensive formula, including all things which are in themselves
good, and that whatever else is good, is not so as an end, but as a
mean, the formula may be accepted or rejected, but is not a subject of
what is commonly understood by proof. We are not, however, to infer that
its acceptance or rejection must depend on blind impulse, or arbitrary
choice. There is a larger meaning of the word proof, in which this
question is as amenable to it as any other of the disputed questions of
philosophy. The subject is within the cognizance of the rational
faculty; and neither does that faculty deal with it solely in the way
of intuition. Considerations may be presented capable of determining the
intellect either to give or withhold its assent to the doctrine; and
this is equivalent to proof.
We shall examine presently of what nature are these considerations; in
what manner they apply to the case, and what rational grounds,
therefore, can be given for accepting or rejecting the utilitarian
formula. But it is a preliminary condition of rational acceptance or
rejection, that the formula should be correctly understood. I believe
that the very imperfect notion ordinarily formed of its meaning, is the
chief obstacle which impedes its reception; and that could it be
cleared, even from only the grosser misconceptions, the question would
be greatly simplified, and a large proportion of its difficulties
removed. Before, therefore, I attempt to enter into the philosophical
grounds which can be given for assenting to the utilitarian standard, I
shall offer some illustrations of the doctrine itself; with the view of
showing more clearly what it is, distinguishing it from what it is not,
and disposing of such of the practical objections to it as either
originate in, or are closely connected with, mistaken interpretations of
its meaning. Having thus prepared the ground, I shall afterwards
endeavour to throw such light as I can upon the question, considered as
one of philosophical theory.
A passing remark is all that needs be given to the ignorant blunder of
supposing that those who stand up for utility as the test of right and
wrong, use the term in that restricted and merely colloquial sense in
which utility is opposed to pleasure. An apology is due to the
philosophical opponents of utilitarianism, for even the momentary
appearance of confounding them with any one capable of so absurd a
misconception; which is the more extraordinary, inasmuch as the contrary
accusation, of referring everything to pleasure, and that too in its
grossest form, is another of the common charges against utilitarianism:
and, as has been pointedly remarked by an able writer, the same sort of
persons, and often the very same persons, denounce the theory "as
impracticably dry when the word utility precedes the word pleasure, and
as too practicably voluptuous when the word pleasure precedes the word
utility." Those who know anything about the matter are aware that every
writer, from Epicurus to Bentham, who maintained the theory of utility,
meant by it, not something to be contradistinguished from pleasure, but
pleasure itself, together with exemption from pain; and instead of
opposing the useful to the agreeable or the ornamental, have always
declared that the useful means these, among other things. Yet the
common herd, including the herd of writers, not only in newspapers and
periodicals, but in books of weight and pretension, are perpetually
falling into this shallow mistake. Having caught up the word
utilitarian, while knowing nothing whatever about it but its sound, they
habitually express by it the rejection, or the neglect, of pleasure in
some of its forms; of beauty, of ornament, or of amusement. Nor is the
term thus ignorantly misapplied solely in disparagement, but
occasionally in compliment; as though it implied superiority to
frivolity and the mere pleasures of the moment. And this perverted use
is the only one in which the word is popularly known, and the one from
which the new generation are acquiring their sole notion of its meaning.
Those who introduced the word, but who had for many years discontinued
it as a distinctive appellation, may well feel themselves called upon to
resume it, if by doing so they can hope to contribute anything towards
rescuing it from this utter degradation.[A]
The creed which accepts as the foundation of morals, Utility, or the
Greatest Happiness Principle, holds that actions are right in proportion
as they tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to produce the
reverse of happiness. By happiness is intended pleasure, and the
absence of pain; by unhappiness, pain, and the privation of pleasure. To
give a clear view of the moral standard set up by the theory, much more
requires to be said; in particular, what things it includes in the ideas
of pain and pleasure; and to what extent this is left an open question.
But these supplementary explanations do not affect the theory of life on
which this theory of morality is grounded--namely, that pleasure, and
freedom from pain, are the only things desirable as ends; and that all
desirable things (which are as numerous in the utilitarian as in any
other scheme) are desirable either for the pleasure inherent in
themselves, or as means to the promotion of pleasure and the prevention
of pain.
Now, such a theory of life excites in many minds, and among them in some
of the most estimable in feeling and purpose, inveterate dislike. To
suppose that life has (as they express it) no higher end than
pleasure--no better and nobler object of desire and pursuit--they
designate as utterly mean and grovelling; as a doctrine worthy only of
swine, to whom the followers of Epicurus were, at a very early period,
contemptuously likened; and modern holders of the doctrine are
occasionally made the subject of equally polite comparisons by its
German, French, and English assailants.
When thus attacked, the Epicureans have always answered, that it is not
they, but their accusers, who represent human nature in a degrading
light; since the accusation supposes human beings to be capable of no
pleasures except those of which swine are capable. If this supposition
were true, the charge could not be gainsaid, but would then be no
longer an imputation; for if the sources of pleasure were precisely the
same to human beings and to swine, the rule of life which is good enough
for the one would be good enough for the other. The comparison of the
Epicurean life to that of beasts is felt as degrading, precisely because
a beast's pleasures do not satisfy a human being's conceptions of
happiness. Human beings have faculties more elevated than the animal
appetites, and when once made conscious of them, do not regard anything
as happiness which does not include their gratification. I do not,
indeed, consider the Epicureans to have been by any means faultless in
drawing out their scheme of consequences from the utilitarian principle.
To do this in any sufficient manner, many Stoic, as well as Christian
elements require to be included. But there is no known Epicurean theory
of life which does not assign to the pleasures of the intellect; of the
feelings and imagination, and of the moral sentiments, a much higher
value as pleasures than to those of mere sensation. It must be admitted,
however, that utilitarian writers in general have placed the superiority
of mental over bodily pleasures chiefly in the greater permanency,
safety, uncostliness, &c., of the former--that is, in their
circumstantial advantages rather than in their intrinsic nature. And on
all these points utilitarians have fully proved their case; but they
might have taken the other, and, as it may be called, higher ground,
with entire consistency. It is quite compatible with the principle of
utility to recognise the fact, that some _kinds_ of pleasure are more
desirable and more valuable than others. It would be absurd that while,
in estimating all other things, quality is considered as well as
quantity, the estimation of pleasures should be supposed to depend on
quantity alone.
If I am asked, what I mean by difference of quality in pleasures, or
what makes one pleasure more valuable than another, merely as a
pleasure, except its being greater in amount, there is but one possible
answer. Of two pleasures, if there be one to which all or almost all who
have experience of both give a decided preference, irrespective of any
feeling of moral obligation to prefer it, that is the more desirable
pleasure. If one of the two is, by those who are competently acquainted
with both, placed so far above the other that they prefer it, even
though knowing it to be attended with a greater amount of discontent,
and would not resign it for any quantity of the other pleasure which
their nature is capable of, we are justified in ascribing to the
preferred enjoyment a superiority in quality, so far outweighing
quantity as to render it, in comparison, of small account.
Now it is an unquestionable fact that those who are equally acquainted
with, and equally capable of appreciating and enjoying, both, do give a
most marked preference to the manner of existence which employs their
higher faculties. Few human creatures would consent to be changed into
any of the lower animals, for a promise of the fullest allowance of a
beast's pleasures; no intelligent human being would consent to be a
fool, no instructed person would be an ignoramus, no person of feeling
and conscience would be selfish and base, even though they should be
persuaded that the fool, the dunce, or the rascal is better satisfied
with his lot than they are with theirs. They would not resign what they
possess more than he, for the most complete satisfaction of all the
desires which they have in common with him. If they ever fancy they
would, it is only in cases of unhappiness so extreme, that to escape
from it they would exchange their lot for almost any other, however
undesirable in their own eyes. A being of higher faculties requires more
to make him happy, is capable probably of more acute suffering, and is
certainly accessible to it at more points, than one of an inferior type;
but in spite of these liabilities, he can never really wish to sink into
what he feels to be a lower grade of existence. We may give what
explanation we please of this unwillingness; we may attribute it to
pride, a name which is given indiscriminately to some of the most and to
some of the least estimable feelings of which mankind are capable; we
may refer it to the love of liberty and personal independence, an appeal
to which was with the Stoics one of the most effective means for the
inculcation of it; to the love of power, or to the love of excitement,
both of which do really enter into and contribute to it: but its most
appropriate appellation is a sense of dignity, which all human beings
possess in one form or other, and in some, though by no means in exact,
proportion to their higher faculties, and which is so essential a part
of the happiness of those in whom it is strong, that nothing which
conflicts with it could be, otherwise than momentarily, an object of
desire to them. Whoever supposes that this preference takes place at a
sacrifice of happiness-that the superior being, in anything like equal
circumstances, is not happier than the inferior-confounds the two very
different ideas, of happiness, and content. It is indisputable that the
being whose capacities of enjoyment are low, has the greatest chance of
having them fully satisfied; and a highly-endowed being will always feel
that any happiness which he can look for, as the world is constituted,
is imperfect. But he can learn to bear its imperfections, if they are at
all bearable; and they will not make him envy the being who is indeed
unconscious of the imperfections, but only because he feels not at all
the good which those imperfections qualify. It is better to be a human
being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be Socrates
dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. And if the fool, or the pig, is of a
different opinion, it is because they only know their own side of the
question. The other party to the comparison knows both sides.
It may be objected, that many who are capable of the higher pleasures,
occasionally, under the influence of temptation, postpone them to the
lower. But this is quite compatible with a full appreciation of the
intrinsic superiority of the higher. Men often, from infirmity of
character, make their election for the nearer good, though they know it
to be the less valuable; and this no less when the choice is between two
bodily pleasures, than when it is between bodily and mental. They pursue
sensual indulgences to the injury of health, though perfectly aware that
health is the greater good. It may be further objected, that many who
begin with youthful enthusiasm for everything noble, as they advance in
years sink into indolence and selfishness. But I do not believe that
those who undergo this very common change, voluntarily choose the lower
description of pleasures in preference to the higher. I believe that
before they devote themselves exclusively to the one, they have already
become incapable of the other. Capacity for the nobler feelings is in
most natures a very tender plant, easily killed, not only by hostile
influences, but by mere want of sustenance; and in the majority of young
persons it speedily dies away if the occupations to which their position
in life has devoted them, and the society into which it has thrown them,
are not favourable to keeping that higher capacity in exercise. Men lose
their high aspirations as they lose their intellectual tastes, because
they have not time or opportunity for indulging them; and they addict
themselves to inferior pleasures, not because they deliberately prefer
them, but because they are either the only ones to which they have
access, or the only ones which they are any longer capable of enjoying.
It may be questioned whether any one who has remained equally
susceptible to both classes of pleasures, ever knowingly and calmly
preferred the lower; though many, in all ages, have broken down in an
ineffectual attempt to combine both.
From this verdict of the only competent judges, I apprehend there can be
no appeal. On a question which is the best worth having of two
pleasures, or which of two modes of existence is the most grateful to
the feelings, apart from its moral attributes and from its consequences,
the judgment of those who are qualified by knowledge of both, or, if
they differ, that of the majority among them, must be admitted as final.
And there needs be the less hesitation to accept this judgment
respecting the quality of pleasures, since there is no other tribunal to
be referred to even on the question of quantity. What means are there of
determining which is the acutest of two pains, or the intensest of two
pleasurable sensations, except the general suffrage of those who are
familiar with both? Neither pains nor pleasures are homogeneous, and
pain is always heterogeneous with pleasure. What is there to decide
whether a particular pleasure is worth purchasing at the cost of a
particular pain, except the feelings and judgment of the experienced?
When, therefore, those feelings and judgment declare the pleasures
derived from the higher faculties to be preferable _in kind_, apart from
the question of intensity, to those of which the animal nature,
disjoined from the higher faculties, is susceptible, they are entitled
on this subject to the same regard.
I have dwelt on this point, as being a necessary part of a perfectly
just conception of Utility or Happiness, considered as the directive
rule of human conduct. But it is by no means an indispensable condition
to the acceptance of the utilitarian standard; for that standard is not
the agent's own greatest happiness, but the greatest amount of happiness
altogether; and if it may possibly be doubted whether a noble character
is always the happier for its nobleness, there can be no doubt that it
makes other people happier, and that the world in general is immensely a
gainer by it. Utilitarianism, therefore, could only attain its end by
the general cultivation of nobleness of character, even if each
individual were only benefited by the nobleness of others, and his own,
so far as happiness is concerned, were a sheer deduction from the
benefit. But the bare enunciation of such an absurdity as this last,
renders refutation superfluous.
According to the Greatest Happiness Principle, as above explained, the
ultimate end, with reference to and for the sake of which all other
things are desirable (whether we are considering our own good or that of
other people), is an existence exempt as far as possible from pain, and
as rich as possible in enjoyments, both in point of quantity and
quality; the test of quality, and the rule for measuring it against
quantity, being the preference felt by those who, in their opportunities
of experience, to which must be added their habits of self-consciousness
and self-observation, are best furnished with the means of comparison.
This, being, according to the utilitarian opinion, the end of human
action, is necessarily also the standard of morality; which may
accordingly be defined, the rules and precepts for human conduct, by the
observance of which an existence such as has been described might be, to
the greatest extent possible, secured to all mankind; and not to them
only, but, so far as the nature of things admits, to the whole sentient
creation.
Against this doctrine, however, arises another class of objectors, who
say that happiness, in any form, cannot be the rational purpose of human
life and action; because, in the first place, it is unattainable: and
they contemptuously ask, What right hast thou to be happy? a question
which Mr. Carlyle clenches by the addition, What right, a short time
ago, hadst thou even _to be_? Next, they say, that men can do _without_
happiness; that all noble human beings have felt this, and could not
have become noble but by learning the lesson of Entsagen, or
renunciation; which lesson, thoroughly learnt and submitted to, they
affirm to be the beginning and necessary condition of all virtue.
The first of these objections would go to the root of the matter were it
well founded; for if no happiness is to be had at all by human beings,
the attainment of it cannot be the end of morality, or of any rational
conduct. Though, even in that case, something might still be said for
the utilitarian theory; since utility includes not solely the pursuit of
happiness, but the prevention or mitigation of unhappiness; and if the
former aim be chimerical, there will be all the greater scope and more
imperative need for the latter, so long at least as mankind think fit to
live, and do not take refuge in the simultaneous act of suicide
recommended under certain conditions by Novalis. When, however, it is
thus positively asserted to be impossible that human life should be
happy, the assertion, if not something like a verbal quibble, is at
least an exaggeration. If by happiness be meant a continuity of highly
pleasurable excitement, it is evident enough that this is impossible. A
state of exalted pleasure lasts only moments, or in some cases, and with
some intermissions, hours or days, and is the occasional brilliant flash
of enjoyment, not its permanent and steady flame. Of this the
philosophers who have taught that happiness is the end of life were as
fully aware as those who taunt them. The happiness which they meant was
not a life of rapture, but moments of such, in an existence made up of
few and transitory pains, many and various pleasures, with a decided
predominance of the active over the passive, and having as the
foundation of the whole, not to expect more from life than it is capable
of bestowing. A life thus composed, to those who have been fortunate
enough to obtain it, has always appeared worthy of the name of
happiness. And such an existence is even now the lot of many, during
some considerable portion of their lives. The present wretched
education, and wretched social arrangements, are the only real hindrance
to its being attainable by almost all.
The objectors perhaps may doubt whether human beings, if taught to
consider happiness as the end of life, would be satisfied with such a
moderate share of it. But great numbers of mankind have been satisfied
with much less. The main constituents of a satisfied life appear to be
two, either of which by itself is often found sufficient for the
purpose: tranquillity, and excitement. With much tranquillity, many find
that they can be content with very little pleasure: with much
excitement, many can reconcile themselves to a considerable quantity of
pain. There is assuredly no inherent impossibility in enabling even the
mass of mankind to unite both; since the two are so far from being
incompatible that they are in natural alliance, the prolongation of
either being a preparation for, and exciting a wish for, the other. It
is only those in whom indolence amounts to a vice, that do not desire
excitement after an interval of repose; it is only those in whom the
need of excitement is a disease, that feel the tranquillity which
follows excitement dull and insipid, instead of pleasurable in direct
proportion to the excitement which preceded it. When people who are
tolerably fortunate in their outward lot do not find in life sufficient
enjoyment to make it valuable to them, the cause generally is, caring
for nobody but themselves. To those who have neither public nor private
affections, the excitements of life are much curtailed, and in any case
dwindle in value as the time approaches when all selfish interests must
be terminated by death: while those who leave after them objects of
personal affection, and especially those who have also cultivated a
fellow-feeling with the collective interests of mankind, retain as
lively an interest in life on the eve of death as in the vigour of youth
and health. Next to selfishness, the principal cause which makes life
unsatisfactory, is want of mental cultivation. A cultivated mind--I do
not mean that of a philosopher, but any mind to which the fountains of
knowledge have been opened, and which has been taught, in any tolerable
degree, to exercise its faculties--finds sources of inexhaustible
interest in all that surrounds it; in the objects of nature, the
achievements of art, the imaginations of poetry, the incidents of
history, the ways of mankind past and present, and their prospects in
the future. It is possible, indeed, to become indifferent to all this,
and that too without having exhausted a thousandth part of it; but only
when one has had from the beginning no moral or human interest in these
things, and has sought in them only the gratification of curiosity.
Now there is absolutely no reason in the nature of things why an amount
of mental culture sufficient to give an intelligent interest in these
objects of contemplation, should not be the inheritance of every one
born in a civilized country. As little is there an inherent necessity
that any human being should be a selfish egotist, devoid of every
feeling or care but those which centre in his own miserable
individuality. Something far superior to this is sufficiently common
even now, to give ample earnest of what the human species may be made.
Genuine private affections, and a sincere interest in the public good,
are possible, though in unequal degrees, to every rightly brought-up
human being. In a world in which there is so much to interest, so much
to enjoy, and so much also to correct and improve, every one who has
this moderate amount of moral and intellectual requisites is capable of
an existence which may be called enviable; and unless such a person,
through bad laws, or subjection to the will of others, is denied the
liberty to use the sources of happiness within his reach, he will not
fail to find this enviable existence, if he escape the positive evils of
life, the great sources of physical and mental suffering--such as
indigence, disease, and the unkindness, worthlessness, or premature loss
of objects of affection. The main stress of the problem lies, therefore,
in the contest with these calamities, from which it is a rare good
fortune entirely to escape; which, as things now are, cannot be
obviated, and often cannot be in any material degree mitigated. Yet no
one whose opinion deserves a moment's consideration can doubt that most
of the great positive evils of the world are in themselves removable,
and will, if human affairs continue to improve, be in the end reduced
within narrow limits. Poverty, in any sense implying suffering, may be
completely extinguished by the wisdom of society, combined with the good
sense and providence of individuals. Even that most intractable of
enemies, disease, may be indefinitely reduced in dimensions by good
physical and moral education, and proper control of noxious influences;
while the progress of science holds out a promise for the future of
still more direct conquests over this detestable foe. And every advance
in that direction relieves us from some, not only of the chances which
cut short our own lives, but, what concerns us still more, which deprive
us of those in whom our happiness is wrapt up. As for vicissitudes of
fortune, and other disappointments connected with worldly circumstances,
these are principally the effect either of gross imprudence, of
ill-regulated desires, or of bad or imperfect social institutions. All
the grand sources, in short, of human suffering are in a great degree,
many of them almost entirely, conquerable by human care and effort; and
though their removal is grievously slow--though a long succession of
generations will perish in the breach before the conquest is completed,
and this world becomes all that, if will and knowledge were not wanting,
it might easily be made--yet every mind sufficiently intelligent and
generous to bear a part, however small and unconspicuous, in the
endeavour, will draw a noble enjoyment from the contest itself, which he
would not for any bribe in the form of selfish indulgence consent to be
without.
And this leads to the true estimation of what is said by the objectors
concerning the possibility, and the obligation, of learning to do
without happiness. Unquestionably it is possible to do without
happiness; it is done involuntarily by nineteen-twentieths of mankind,
even in those parts of our present world which are least deep in
barbarism; and it often has to be done voluntarily by the hero or the
martyr, for the sake of something which he prizes more than his
individual happiness. But this something, what is it, unless the
happiness of others, or some of the requisites of happiness? It is noble
to be capable of resigning entirely one's own portion of happiness, or
chances of it: but, after all, this self-sacrifice must be for some end;
it is not its own end; and if we are told that its end is not happiness,
but virtue, which is better than happiness, I ask, would the sacrifice
be made if the hero or martyr did not believe that it would earn for
others immunity from similar sacrifices? Would it be made, if he thought
that his renunciation of happiness for himself would produce no fruit
for any of his fellow creatures, but to make their lot like his, and
place them also in the condition of persons who have renounced
happiness? All honour to those who can abnegate for themselves the
personal enjoyment of life, when by such renunciation they contribute
worthily to increase the amount of happiness in the world; but he who
does it, or professes to do it, for any other purpose, is no more
deserving of admiration than the ascetic mounted on his pillar. He may
be an inspiriting proof of what men _can_ do, but assuredly not an
example of what they _should_.
Though it is only in a very imperfect state of the world's arrangements
that any one can best serve the happiness of others by the absolute
sacrifice of his own, yet so long as the world is in that imperfect
state, I fully acknowledge that the readiness to make such a sacrifice
is the highest virtue which can be found in man. I will add, that in
this condition of the world, paradoxical as the assertion may be, the
conscious ability to do without happiness gives the best prospect of
realizing such happiness as is attainable. For nothing except that
consciousness can raise a person above the chances of life, by making
him feel that, let fate and fortune do their worst, they have not power
to subdue him: which, once felt, frees him from excess of anxiety
concerning the evils of life, and enables him, like many a Stoic in the
worst times of the Roman Empire, to cultivate in tranquillity the
sources of satisfaction accessible to him, without concerning himself
about the uncertainty of their duration, any more than about their
inevitable end.
Meanwhile, let utilitarians never cease to claim the morality of
self-devotion as a possession which belongs by as good a right to them,
as either to the Stoic or to the Transcendentalist. The utilitarian
morality does recognise in human beings the power of sacrificing their
own greatest good for the good of others. It only refuses to admit that
the sacrifice is itself a good. A sacrifice which does not increase, or
tend to increase, the sum total of happiness, it considers as wasted.
The only self-renunciation which it applauds, is devotion to the
happiness, or to some of the means of happiness, of others; either of
mankind collectively, or of individuals within the limits imposed by the
collective interests of mankind.
I must again repeat, what the assailants of utilitarianism seldom have
the justice to acknowledge, that the happiness which forms the
utilitarian standard of what is right in conduct, is not the agent's own
happiness, but that of all concerned. As between his own happiness and
that of others, utilitarianism requires him to be as strictly impartial
as a disinterested and benevolent spectator. In the golden rule of Jesus
of Nazareth, we read the complete spirit of the ethics of utility. To
do as one would be done by, and to love one's neighbour as oneself,
constitute the ideal perfection of utilitarian morality. As the means of
making the nearest approach to this ideal, utility would enjoin, first,
that laws and social arrangements should place the happiness, or (as
speaking practically it may be called) the interest, of every
individual, as nearly as possible in harmony with the interest of the
whole; and secondly, that education and opinion, which have so vast a
power over human character, should so use that power as to establish in
the mind of every individual an indissoluble association between his own
happiness and the good of the whole; especially between his own
happiness and the practice of such modes of conduct, negative and
positive, as regard for the universal happiness prescribes: so that not
only he may be unable to conceive the possibility of happiness to
himself, consistently with conduct opposed to the general good, but also
that a direct impulse to promote the general good may be in every
individual one of the habitual motives of action, and the sentiments
connected therewith may fill a large and prominent place in every human
being's sentient existence. If the impugners of the utilitarian morality
represented it to their own minds in this its true character, I know not
what recommendation possessed by any other morality they could possibly
affirm to be wanting to it: what more beautiful or more exalted
developments of human nature any other ethical system can be supposed to
foster, or what springs of action, not accessible to the utilitarian,
such systems rely on for giving effect to their mandates.
The objectors to utilitarianism cannot always be charged with
representing it in a discreditable light. On the contrary, those among
them who entertain anything like a just idea of its disinterested
character, sometimes find fault with its standard as being too high for
humanity. They say it is exacting too much to require that people shall
always act from the inducement of promoting the general interests of
society. But this is to mistake the very meaning of a standard of
morals, and to confound the rule of action with the motive of it. It is
the business of ethics to tell us what are our duties, or by what test
we may know them; but no system of ethics requires that the sole motive
of all we do shall be a feeling of duty; on the contrary, ninety-nine
hundredths of all our actions are done from other motives, and rightly
so done, if the rule of duty does not condemn them. It is the more
unjust to utilitarianism that this particular misapprehension should be
made a ground of objection to it, inasmuch as utilitarian moralists have
gone beyond almost all others in affirming that the motive has nothing
to do with the morality of the action, though much with the worth of the
agent. He who saves a fellow creature from drowning does what is morally
right, whether his motive be duty, or the hope of being paid for his
trouble: he who betrays the friend that trusts him, is guilty of a
crime, even if his object be to serve another friend to whom he is under
greater obligations.[B] But to speak only of actions done from the
motive of duty, and in direct obedience to principle: it is a
misapprehension of the utilitarian mode of thought, to conceive it as
implying that people should fix their minds upon so wide a generality as
the world, or society at large. The great majority of good actions are
intended, not for the benefit of the world, but for that of individuals,
of which the good of the world is made up; and the thoughts of the most
virtuous man need not on these occasions travel beyond the particular
persons concerned, except so far as is necessary to assure himself that
in benefiting them he is not violating the rights--that is, the
legitimate and authorized expectations--of any one else. The
multiplication of happiness is, according to the utilitarian ethics, the
object of virtue: the occasions on which any person (except one in a
thousand) has it in his power to do this on an extended scale, in other
words, to be a public benefactor, are but exceptional; and on these
occasions alone is he called on to consider public utility; in every
other case, private utility, the interest or happiness of some few
persons, is all he has to attend to. Those alone the influence of whose
actions extends to society in general, need concern themselves
habitually about so large an object. In the case of abstinences
indeed--of things which people forbear to do, from moral considerations,
though the consequences in the particular case might be beneficial--it
would be unworthy of an intelligent agent not to be consciously aware
that the action is of a class which, if practised generally, would be
generally injurious, and that this is the ground of the obligation to
abstain from it. The amount of regard for the public interest implied in
this recognition, is no greater than is demanded by every system of
morals; for they all enjoin to abstain from whatever is manifestly
pernicious to society.
The same considerations dispose of another reproach against the doctrine
of utility, founded on a still grosser misconception of the purpose of a
standard of morality, and of the very meaning of the words right and
wrong. It is often affirmed that utilitarianism renders men cold and
unsympathizing; that it chills their moral feelings towards
individuals; that it makes them regard only the dry and hard
consideration of the consequences of actions, not taking into their
moral estimate the qualities from which those actions emanate. If the
assertion means that they do not allow their judgment respecting the
rightness or wrongness of an action to be influenced by their opinion of
the qualities of the person who does it, this is a complaint not against
utilitarianism, but against having any standard of morality at all; for
certainly no known ethical standard decides an action to be good or bad
because it is done by a good or a bad man, still less because done by an
amiable, a brave, or a benevolent man or the contrary. These
considerations are relevant, not to the estimation of actions, but of
persons; and there is nothing in the utilitarian theory inconsistent
with the fact that there are other things which interest us in persons
besides the rightness and wrongness of their actions. The Stoics,
indeed, with the paradoxical misuse of language which was part of their
system, and by which they strove to raise themselves above all concern
about anything but virtue, were fond of saying that he who has that has
everything; that he, and only he, is rich, is beautiful, is a king. But
no claim of this description is made for the virtuous man by the
utilitarian doctrine. Utilitarians are quite aware that there are other
desirable possessions and qualities besides virtue, and are perfectly
willing to allow to all of them their full worth. They are also aware
that a right action does not necessarily indicate a virtuous character,
and that actions which are blameable often proceed from qualities
entitled to praise. When this is apparent in any particular case, it
modifies their estimation, not certainly of the act, but of the agent.
I grant that they are, notwithstanding, of opinion, that in the long run
the best proof of a good character is good actions; and resolutely
refuse to consider any mental disposition as good, of which the
predominant tendency is to produce bad conduct. This makes them
unpopular with many people; but it is an unpopularity which they must
share with every one who regards the distinction between right and wrong
in a serious light; and the reproach is not one which a conscientious
utilitarian need be anxious to repel.
If no more be meant by the objection than that many utilitarians look on
the morality of actions, as measured by the utilitarian standard, with
too exclusive a regard, and do not lay sufficient stress upon the other
beauties of character which go towards making a human being loveable or
admirable, this may be admitted. Utilitarians who have cultivated their
moral feelings, but not their sympathies nor their artistic perceptions,
do fall into this mistake; and so do all other moralists under the same
conditions. What can be said in excuse for other moralists is equally
available for them, namely, that if there is to be any error, it is
better that it should be on that side. As a matter of fact, we may
affirm that among utilitarians as among adherents of other systems,
there is every imaginable degree of rigidity and of laxity in the
application of their standard: some are even puritanically rigorous,
while others are as indulgent as can possibly be desired by sinner or by
sentimentalist. But on the whole, a doctrine which brings prominently
forward the interest that mankind have in the repression and prevention
of conduct which violates the moral law, is likely to be inferior to no
other in turning the sanctions of opinion against such violations. It is
true, the question, What does violate the moral law? is one on which
those who recognise different standards of morality are likely now and
then to differ. But difference of opinion on moral questions was not
first introduced into the world by utilitarianism, while that doctrine
does supply, if not always an easy, at all events a tangible and
intelligible mode of deciding such differences.
It may not be superfluous to notice a few more of the common
misapprehensions of utilitarian ethics, even those which are so obvious
and gross that it might appear impossible for any person of candour and
intelligence to fall into them: since persons, even of considerable
mental endowments, often give themselves so little trouble to understand
the bearings of any opinion against which they entertain a prejudice,
and men are in general so little conscious of this voluntary ignorance
as a defect, that the vulgarest misunderstandings of ethical doctrines
are continually met with in the deliberate writings of persons of the
greatest pretensions both to high principle and to philosophy. We not
uncommonly hear the doctrine of utility inveighed against as a _godless_
doctrine. If it be necessary to say anything at all against so mere an
assumption, we may say that the question depends upon what idea we have
formed of the moral character of the Deity. If it be a true belief that
God desires, above all things, the happiness of his creatures, and that
this was his purpose in their creation, utility is not only not a
godless doctrine, but more profoundly religious than any other. If it be
meant that utilitarianism does not recognise the revealed will of God as
the supreme law of morals, I answer, that an utilitarian who believes in
the perfect goodness and wisdom of God, necessarily believes that
whatever God has thought fit to reveal on the subject of morals, must
fulfil the requirements of utility in a supreme degree. But others
besides utilitarians have been of opinion that the Christian revelation
was intended, and is fitted, to inform the hearts and minds of mankind
with a spirit which should enable them to find for themselves what is
right, and incline them to do it when found, rather than to tell them,
except in a very general way, what it is: and that we need a doctrine of
ethics, carefully followed out, to _interpret_ to us the will of God.
Whether this opinion is correct or not, it is superfluous here to
discuss; since whatever aid religion, either natural or revealed, can
afford to ethical investigation, is as open to the utilitarian moralist
as to any other. He can use it as the testimony of God to the usefulness
or hurtfulness of any given course of action, by as good a right as
others can use it for the indication of a transcendental law, having no
connexion with usefulness or with happiness.
Again, Utility is often summarily stigmatized as an immoral doctrine by
giving it the name of Expediency, and taking advantage of the popular
use of that term to contrast it with Principle. But the Expedient, in
the sense in which it is opposed to the Right, generally means that
which is expedient for the particular interest of the agent himself: as
when a minister sacrifices the interest of his country to keep himself
in place. When it means anything better than this, it means that which
is expedient for some immediate object, some temporary purpose, but
which violates a rule whose observance is expedient in a much higher
degree. The Expedient, in this sense, instead of being the same thing
with the useful, is a branch of the hurtful. Thus, it would often be
expedient, for the purpose of getting over some momentary embarrassment,
or attaining some object immediately useful to ourselves or others, to
tell a lie. But inasmuch as the cultivation in ourselves of a sensitive
feeling on the subject of veracity, is one of the most useful, and the
enfeeblement of that feeling one of the most hurtful, things to which
our conduct can be instrumental; and inasmuch as any, even
unintentional, deviation from truth, does that much towards weakening
the trustworthiness of human assertion, which is not only the principal
support of all present social well-being, but the insufficiency of which
does more than any one thing that can be named to keep back
civilisation, virtue, everything on which human happiness on the largest
scale depends; we feel that the violation, for a present advantage, of a
rule of such transcendent expediency, is not expedient, and that he who,
for the sake of a convenience to himself or to some other individual,
does what depends on him to deprive mankind of the good, and inflict
upon them the evil, involved in the greater or less reliance which they
can place in each other's word, acts the part of one of their worst
enemies. Yet that even this rule, sacred as it is, admits of possible
exceptions, is acknowledged by all moralists; the chief of which is when
the withholding of some fact (as of information from a male-factor, or
of bad news from a person dangerously ill) would preserve some one
(especially a person other than oneself) from great and unmerited evil,
and when the withholding can only be effected by denial. But in order
that the exception may not extend itself beyond the need, and may have
the least possible effect in weakening reliance on veracity, it ought to
be recognized, and, if possible, its limits defined; and if the
principle of utility is good for anything, it must be good for weighing
these conflicting utilities against one another, and marking out the
region within which one or the other preponderates.
Again, defenders of utility often find themselves called upon to reply
to such objections as this--that there is not time, previous to action,
for calculating and weighing the effects of any line of conduct on the
general happiness. This is exactly as if any one were to say that it is
impossible to guide our conduct by Christianity, because there is not
time, on every occasion on which anything has to be done, to read
through the Old and New Testaments. The answer to the objection is, that
there has been ample time, namely, the whole past duration of the human
species. During all that time mankind have been learning by experience
the tendencies of actions; on which experience all the prudence, as well
as all the morality of life, is dependent. People talk as if the
commencement of this course of experience had hitherto been put off, and
as if, at the moment when some man feels tempted to meddle with the
property or life of another, he had to begin considering for the first
time whether murder and theft are injurious to human happiness. Even
then I do not think that he would find the question very puzzling; but,
at all events, the matter is now done to his hand. It is truly a
whimsical supposition, that if mankind were agreed in considering
utility to be the test of morality, they would remain without any
agreement as to what is useful, and would take no measures for having
their notions on the subject taught to the young, and enforced by law
and opinion. There is no difficulty in proving any ethical standard
whatever to work ill, if we suppose universal idiocy to be conjoined
with it, but on any hypothesis short of that, mankind must by this time
have acquired positive beliefs as to the effects of some actions on
their happiness; and the beliefs which have thus come down are the rules
of morality for the multitude, and for the philosopher until he has
succeeded in finding better. That philosophers might easily do this,
even now, on many subjects; that the received code of ethics is by no
means of divine right; and that mankind have still much to learn as to
the effects of actions on the general happiness, I admit, or rather,
earnestly maintain. The corollaries from the principle of utility, like
the precepts of every practical art, admit of indefinite improvement,
and, in a progressive state of the human mind, their improvement is
perpetually going on. But to consider the rules of morality as
improvable, is one thing; to pass over the intermediate generalizations
entirely, and endeavour to test each individual action directly by the
first principle, is another. It is a strange notion that the
acknowledgment of a first principle is inconsistent with the admission
of secondary ones. To inform a traveller respecting the place of his
ultimate destination, is not to forbid the use of landmarks and
direction-posts on the way. The proposition that happiness is the end
and aim of morality, does not mean that no road ought to be laid down to
that goal, or that persons going thither should not be advised to take
one direction rather than another. Men really ought to leave off talking
a kind of nonsense on this subject, which they would neither talk nor
listen to on other matters of practical concernment. Nobody argues that
the art of navigation is not founded on astronomy, because sailors
cannot wait to calculate the Nautical Almanack. Being rational
creatures, they go to sea with it ready calculated; and all rational
creatures go out upon the sea of life with their minds made up on the
common questions of right and wrong, as well as on many of the far more
difficult questions of wise and foolish. And this, as long as foresight
is a human quality, it is to be presumed they will continue to do.
Whatever we adopt as the fundamental principle of morality, we require
subordinate principles to apply it by: the impossibility of doing
without them, being common to all systems, can afford no argument
against any one in particular: but gravely to argue as if no such
secondary principles could be had, and as if mankind had remained till
now, and always must remain, without drawing any general conclusions
from the experience of human life, is as high a pitch, I think, as
absurdity has ever reached in philosophical controversy.
The remainder of the stock arguments against utilitarianism mostly
consist in laying to its charge the common infirmities of human nature,
and the general difficulties which embarrass conscientious persons in
shaping their course through life. We are told that an utilitarian will
be apt to make his own particular case an exception to moral rules, and,
when under temptation, will see an utility in the breach of a rule,
greater than he will see in its observance. But is utility the only
creed which is able to furnish us with excuses for evil doing, and means
of cheating our own conscience? They are afforded in abundance by all
doctrines which recognise as a fact in morals the existence of
conflicting considerations; which all doctrines do, that have been
believed by sane persons. It is not the fault of any creed, but of the
complicated nature of human affairs, that rules of conduct cannot be so
framed as to require no exceptions, and that hardly any kind of action
can safely be laid down as either always obligatory or always
condemnable. There is no ethical creed which does not temper the
rigidity of its laws, by giving a certain latitude, under the moral
responsibility of the agent, for accommodation to peculiarities of
circumstances; and under every creed, at the opening thus made,
self-deception and dishonest casuistry get in. There exists no moral
system under which there do not arise unequivocal cases of conflicting
obligation. These are the real difficulties, the knotty points both in
the theory of ethics, and in the conscientious guidance of personal
conduct. They are overcome practically with greater or with less success
according to the intellect and virtue of the individual; but it can
hardly be pretended that any one will be the less qualified for dealing
with them, from possessing an ultimate standard to which conflicting
rights and duties can be referred. If utility is the ultimate source of
moral obligations, utility may be invoked to decide between them when
their demands are incompatible. Though the application of the standard
may be difficult, it is better than none at all: while in other systems,
the moral laws all claiming independent authority, there is no common
umpire entitled to interfere between them; their claims to precedence
one over another rest on little better than sophistry, and unless
determined, as they generally are, by the unacknowledged influence of
considerations of utility, afford a free scope for the action of
personal desires and partialities. We must remember that only in these
cases of conflict between secondary principles is it requisite that
first principles should be appealed to. There is no case of moral
obligation in which some secondary principle is not involved; and if
only one, there can seldom be any real doubt which one it is, in the
mind of any person by whom the principle itself is recognized.
[Footnote A: The author of this essay has reason for believing himself
to be the first person who brought the word utilitarian into use. He did
not invent it, but adopted it from a passing expression in Mr. Galt's
_Annals of the Parish_. After using it as a designation for several
years, he and others abandoned it from a growing dislike to anything
resembling a badge or watchword of sectarian distinction. But as a name
for one single opinion, not a set of opinions--to denote the recognition
of utility as a standard, not any particular way of applying it--the
term supplies a want in the language, and offers, in many cases, a
convenient mode of avoiding tiresome circumlocution.]
[Footnote B: An opponent, whose intellectual and moral fairness it is a
pleasure to acknowledge (the Rev. J. Llewellyn Davis), has objected to
this passage, saying, "Surely the rightness or wrongness of saving a man
from drowning does depend very much upon the motive with which it is
done. Suppose that a tyrant, when his enemy jumped into the sea to
escape from him, saved him from drowning simply in order that he might
inflict upon him more exquisite tortures, would it tend to clearness to
speak of that rescue as 'a morally right action?' Or suppose again,
according to one of the stock illustrations of ethical inquiries, that a
man betrayed a trust received from a friend, because the discharge of it
would fatally injure that friend himself or some one belonging to him,
would utilitarianism compel one to call the betrayal 'a crime' as much
as if it had been done from the meanest motive?"
I submit, that he who saves another from drowning in order to kill him
by torture afterwards, does not differ only in motive from him who does
the same thing from duty or benevolence; the act itself is different.
The rescue of the man is, in the case supposed, only the necessary first
step of an act far more atrocious than leaving him to drown would have
been. Had Mr. Davis said, "The rightness or wrongness of saving a man
from drowning does depend very much"--not upon the motive, but--"upon
the _intention_" no utilitarian would have differed from him. Mr. Davis,
by an oversight too common not to be quite venial, has in this case
confounded the very different ideas of Motive and Intention. There is no
point which utilitarian thinkers (and Bentham pre-eminently) have taken
more pains to illustrate than this. The morality of the action depends
entirely upon the intention--that is, upon what the agent _wills to do_.
But the motive, that is, the feeling which makes him will so to do, when
it makes no difference in the act, makes none in the morality: though it
makes a great difference in our moral estimation of the agent,
especially if it indicates a good or a bad habitual _disposition_--a
bent of character from which useful, or from which hurtful actions are
likely to arise.]
The question is often asked, and properly so, in regard to any supposed
moral standard--What is its sanction? what are the motives to obey it?
or more specifically, what is the source of its obligation? whence does
it derive its binding force? It is a necessary part of moral philosophy
to provide the answer to this question; which, though frequently
assuming the shape of an objection to the utilitarian morality, as if it
had some special applicability to that above others, really arises in
regard to all standards. It arises, in fact, whenever a person is called
on to adopt a standard or refer morality to any basis on which he has
not been accustomed to rest it. For the customary morality, that which
education and opinion have consecrated, is the only one which presents
itself to the mind with the feeling of being _in itself_ obligatory; and
when a person is asked to believe that this morality _derives_ its
obligation from some general principle round which custom has not thrown
the same halo, the assertion is to him a paradox; the supposed
corollaries seem to have a more binding force than the original theorem;
the superstructure seems to stand better without, than with, what is
represented as its foundation. He says to himself, I feel that I am
bound not to rob or murder, betray or deceive; but why am I bound to
promote the general happiness? If my own happiness lies in something
else, why may I not give that the preference?
If the view adopted by the utilitarian philosophy of the nature of the
moral sense be correct, this difficulty will always present itself,
until the influences which form moral character have taken the same hold
of the principle which they have taken of some of the
consequences--until, by the improvement of education, the feeling of
unity with our fellow creatures shall be (what it cannot be doubted that
Christ intended it to be) as deeply rooted in our character, and to our
own consciousness as completely a part of our nature, as the horror of
crime is in an ordinarily well-brought-up young person. In the mean
time, however, the difficulty has no peculiar application to the
doctrine of utility, but is inherent in every attempt to analyse
morality and reduce it to principles; which, unless the principle is
already in men's minds invested with as much sacredness as any of its
applications, always seems to divest them of a part of their sanctity.
The principle of utility either has, or there is no reason why it might
not have, all the sanctions which belong to any other system of morals.
Those sanctions are either external or internal. Of the external
sanctions it is not necessary to speak at any length. They are, the hope
of favour and the fear of displeasure from our fellow creatures or from
the Ruler of the Universe, along with whatever we may have of sympathy
or affection for them or of love and awe of Him, inclining us to do His
will independently of selfish consequences. There is evidently no
reason why all these motives for observance should not attach themselves
to the utilitarian morality, as completely and as powerfully as to any
other. Indeed, those of them which refer to our fellow creatures are
sure to do so, in proportion to the amount of general intelligence; for
whether there be any other ground of moral obligation than the general
happiness or not, men do desire happiness; and however imperfect may be
their own practice, they desire and commend all conduct in others
towards themselves, by which they think their happiness is promoted.
With regard to the religious motive, if men believe, as most profess to
do, in the goodness of God, those who think that conduciveness to the
general happiness is the essence, or even only the criterion, of good,
must necessarily believe that it is also that which God approves. The
whole force therefore of external reward and punishment, whether
physical or moral, and whether proceeding from God or from our fellow
men, together with all that the capacities of human nature admit, of
disinterested devotion to either, become available to enforce the
utilitarian morality, in proportion as that morality is recognized; and
the more powerfully, the more the appliances of education and general
cultivation are bent to the purpose.
So far as to external sanctions. The internal sanction of duty, whatever
our standard of duty may be, is one and the same--a feeling in our own
mind; a pain, more or less intense, attendant on violation of duty,
which in properly cultivated moral natures rises, in the more serious
cases, into shrinking from it as an impossibility. This feeling, when
disinterested, and connecting itself with the pure idea of duty, and
not with some particular form of it, or with any of the merely accessory
circumstances, is the essence of Conscience; though in that complex
phenomenon as it actually exists, the simple fact is in general all
encrusted over with collateral associations, derived from sympathy, from
love, and still more from fear; from all the forms of religious feeling;
from the recollections of childhood and of all our past life; from
self-esteem, desire of the esteem of others, and occasionally even
self-abasement. This extreme complication is, I apprehend, the origin of
the sort of mystical character which, by a tendency of the human mind of
which there are many other examples, is apt to be attributed to the idea
of moral obligation, and which leads people to believe that the idea
cannot possibly attach itself to any other objects than those which, by
a supposed mysterious law, are found in our present experience to excite
it. Its binding force, however, consists in the existence of a mass of
feeling which must be broken through in order to do what violates our
standard of right, and which, if we do nevertheless violate that
standard, will probably have to be encountered afterwards in the form of
remorse. Whatever theory we have of the nature or origin of conscience,
this is what essentially constitutes it.
The ultimate sanction, therefore, of all morality (external motives
apart) being a subjective feeling in our own minds, I see nothing
embarrassing to those whose standard is utility, in the question, what
is the sanction of that particular standard? We may answer, the same as
of all other moral standards--the conscientious feelings of mankind.
Undoubtedly this sanction has no binding efficacy on those who do not
possess the feelings it appeals to; but neither will these persons be
more obedient to any other moral principle than to the utilitarian one.
On them morality of any kind has no hold but through the external
sanctions. Meanwhile the feelings exist, a feet in human nature, the
reality of which, and the great power with which they are capable of
acting on those in whom they have been duly cultivated, are proved by
experience. No reason has ever been shown why they may not be cultivated
to as great intensity in connection with the utilitarian, as with any
other rule of morals.
There is, I am aware, a disposition to believe that a person who sees in
moral obligation a transcendental fact, an objective reality belonging
to the province of "Things in themselves," is likely to be more obedient
to it than one who believes it to be entirely subjective, having its
seat in human consciousness only. But whatever a person's opinion may be
on this point of Ontology, the force he is really urged by is his own
subjective feeling, and is exactly measured by its strength. No one's
belief that Duty is an objective reality is stronger than the belief
that God is so; yet the belief in God, apart from the expectation of
actual reward and punishment, only operates on conduct through, and in
proportion to, the subjective religious feeling. The sanction, so far as
it is disinterested, is always in the mind itself; and the notion,
therefore, of the transcendental moralists must be, that this sanction
will not exist _in_ the mind unless it is believed to have its root out
of the mind; and that if a person is able to say to himself, That which
is restraining me, and which is called my conscience, is only a feeling
in my own mind, he may possibly draw the conclusion that when the
feeling ceases the obligation ceases, and that if he find the feeling
inconvenient, he may disregard it, and endeavour to get rid of it. But
is this danger confined to the utilitarian morality? Does the belief
that moral obligation has its seat outside the mind make the feeling of
it too strong to be got rid of? The fact is so far otherwise, that all
moralists admit and lament the ease with which, in the generality of
minds, conscience can be silenced or stifled. The question, Need I obey
my conscience? is quite as often put to themselves by persons who never
heard of the principle of utility, as by its adherents. Those whose
conscientious feelings are so weak as to allow of their asking this
question, if they answer it affirmatively, will not do so because they
believe in the transcendental theory, but because of the external
sanctions.
It is not necessary, for the present purpose, to decide whether the
feeling of duty is innate or implanted. Assuming it to be innate, it is
an open question to what objects it naturally attaches itself; for the
philosophic supporters of that theory are now agreed that the intuitive
perception is of principles of morality, and not of the details. If
there be anything innate in the matter, I see no reason why the feeling
which is innate should not be that of regard to the pleasures and pains
of others. If there is any principle of morals which is intuitively
obligatory, I should say it must be that. If so, the intuitive ethics
would coincide with the utilitarian, and there would be no further
quarrel between them. Even as it is, the intuitive moralists, though
they believe that there are other intuitive moral obligations, do
already believe this to be one; for they unanimously hold that a large
portion of morality turns upon the consideration due to the interests of
our fellow creatures. Therefore, if the belief in the transcendental
origin of moral obligation gives any additional efficacy to the internal
sanction, it appears to me that the utilitarian principle has already
the benefit of it.
On the other hand, if, as is my own belief, the moral feelings are not
innate, but acquired, they are not for that reason the less natural. It
is natural to man to speak, to reason, to build cities, to cultivate the
ground, though these are acquired faculties. The moral feelings are not
indeed a part of our nature, in the sense of being in any perceptible
degree present in all of us; but this, unhappily, is a fact admitted by
those who believe the most strenuously in their transcendental origin.
Like the other acquired capacities above referred to, the moral faculty,
if not a part of our nature, is a natural outgrowth from it; capable,
like them, in a certain small degree, of springing up spontaneously; and
susceptible of being brought by cultivation to a high degree of
development. Unhappily it is also susceptible, by a sufficient use of
the external sanctions and of the force of early impressions, of being
cultivated in almost any direction: so that there is hardly anything so
absurd or so mischievous that it may not, by means of these influences,
be made to act on the human mind with all the authority of conscience.
To doubt that the same potency might be given by the same means to the
principle of utility, even if it had no foundation in human nature,
would be flying in the face of all experience.
But moral associations which are wholly of artificial creation, when
intellectual culture goes on, yield by degrees to the dissolving force
of analysis: and if the feeling of duty, when associated with utility,
would appear equally arbitrary; if there were no leading department of
our nature, no powerful class of sentiments, with which that association
would harmonize, which would make us feel it congenial, and incline us
not only to foster it in others (for which we have abundant interested
motives), but also to cherish it in ourselves; if there were not, in
short, a natural basis of sentiment for utilitarian morality, it might
well happen that this association also, even after it had been implanted
by education, might be analysed away.
But there is this basis of powerful natural sentiment; and this it is
which, when once the general happiness is recognized as the ethical
standard, will constitute the strength of the utilitarian morality. This
firm foundation is that of the social feelings of mankind; the desire to
be in unity with our fellow creatures, which is already a powerful
principle in human nature, and happily one of those which tend to become
stronger, even without express inculcation, from the influences of
advancing civilization. The social state is at once so natural, so
necessary, and so habitual to man, that, except in some unusual
circumstances or by an effort of voluntary abstraction, he never
conceives himself otherwise than as a member of a body; and this
association is riveted more and more, as mankind are further removed
from the state of savage independence. Any condition, therefore, which
is essential to a state of society, becomes more and more an inseparable
part of every person's conception of the state of things which he is
born into, and which is the destiny of a human being. Now, society
between human beings, except in the relation of master and slave, is
manifestly impossible on any other footing than that the interests of
all are to be consulted. Society between equals can only exist on the
understanding that the interests of all are to be regarded equally. And
since in all states of civilization, every person, except an absolute
monarch, has equals, every one is obliged to live on these terms with
somebody; and in every age some advance is made towards a state in which
it will be impossible to live permanently on other terms with anybody.
In this way people grow up unable to conceive as possible to them a
state of total disregard of other people's interests. They are under a
necessity of conceiving themselves as at least abstaining from all the
grosser injuries, and (if only for their own protection.) living in a
state of constant protest against them. They are also familiar with the
fact of co-operating with others, and proposing to themselves a
collective, not an individual, interest, as the aim (at least for the
time being) of their actions. So long as they are co-operating, their
ends are identified with those of others; there is at least a temporary
feeling that the interests of others are their own interests. Not only
does all strengthening of social ties, and all healthy growth of
society, give to each individual a stronger personal interest in
practically consulting the welfare of others; it also leads him to
identify his feelings more and more with their good, or at least with
an ever greater degree of practical consideration for it. He comes, as
though instinctively, to be conscious of himself as a being who _of
course_ pays regard to others. The good of others becomes to him a thing
naturally and necessarily to be attended to, like any of the physical
conditions of our existence. Now, whatever amount of this feeling a
person has, he is urged by the strongest motives both of interest and of
sympathy to demonstrate it, and to the utmost of his power encourage it
in others; and even if he has none of it himself, he is as greatly
interested as any one else that others should have it. Consequently, the
smallest germs of the feeling are laid hold of and nourished by the
contagion of sympathy and the influences of education; and a complete
web of corroborative association is woven round it, by the powerful
agency of the external sanctions. This mode of conceiving ourselves and
human life, as civilization goes on, is felt to be more and more
natural. Every step in political improvement renders it more so, by
removing the sources of opposition of interest, and levelling those
inequalities of legal privilege between individuals or classes, owing to
which there are large portions of mankind whose happiness it is still
practicable to disregard. In an improving state of the human mind, the
influences are constantly on the increase, which tend to generate in
each individual a feeling of unity with all the rest; which feeling, if
perfect, would make him never think of, or desire, any beneficial
condition for himself, in the benefits of which they are not included.
If we now suppose this feeling of unity to be taught as a religion, and
the whole force of education, of institutions, and of opinion,
directed, as it once was in the case of religion, to make every person
grow up from infancy surrounded on all sides both by the profession and
by the practice of it, I think that no one, who can realize this
conception, will feel any misgiving about the sufficiency of the
ultimate sanction for the Happiness morality. To any ethical student who
finds the realization difficult, I recommend, as a means of facilitating
it, the second of M. Comte's two principal works, the _Système de
Politique Positive_. I entertain the strongest objections to the system
of politics and morals set forth in that treatise; but I think it has
superabundantly shown the possibility of giving to the service of
humanity, even without the aid of belief in a Providence, both the
physical power and the social efficacy of a religion; making it take
hold of human life, and colour all thought, feeling, and action, in a
manner of which the greatest ascendency ever exercised by any religion
may be but a type and foretaste; and of which the danger is, not that it
should be insufficient, but that it should be so excessive as to
interfere unduly with human freedom and individuality.
Neither is it necessary to the feeling which constitutes the binding
force of the utilitarian morality on those who recognize it, to wait for
those social influences which would make its obligation felt by mankind
at large. In the comparatively early state of human advancement in which
we now live, a person cannot indeed feel that entireness of sympathy
with all others, which would make any real discordance in the general
direction of their conduct in life impossible; but already a person in
whom the social feeling is at all developed, cannot bring himself to
think of the rest of his fellow creatures as struggling rivals with him
for the means of happiness, whom he must desire to see defeated in their
object in order that he may succeed in his. The deeply-rooted conception
which every individual even now has of himself as a social being, tends
to make him feel it one of his natural wants that there should be
harmony between his feelings and aims and those of his fellow creatures.
If differences of opinion and of mental culture make it impossible for
him to share many of their actual feelings-perhaps make him denounce and
defy those feelings-he still needs to be conscious that his real aim and
theirs do not conflict; that he is not opposing himself to what they
really wish for, namely, their own good, but is, on the contrary,
promoting it. This feeling in most individuals is much inferior in
strength to their selfish feelings, and is often wanting altogether. But
to those who have it, it possesses all the characters of a natural
feeling. It does not present itself to their minds as a superstition of
education, or a law despotically imposed by the power of society, but as
an attribute which it would not be well for them to be without. This
conviction is the ultimate sanction of the greatest-happiness morality.
This it is which makes any mind, of well-developed feelings, work with,
and not against, the outward motives to care for others, afforded by
what I have called the external sanctions; and when those sanctions are
wanting, or act in an opposite direction, constitutes in itself a
powerful internal binding force, in proportion to the sensitiveness and
thoughtfulness of the character; since few but those whose mind is a
moral blank, could bear to lay out their course of life on the plan of
paying no regard to others except so far as their own private interest
compels.
It has already been remarked, that questions of ultimate ends do not
admit of proof, in the ordinary acceptation of the term. To be incapable
of proof by reasoning is common to all first principles; to the first
premises of our knowledge, as well as to those of our conduct. But the
former, being matters of fact, may be the subject of a direct appeal to
the faculties which judge of fact--namely, our senses, and our internal
consciousness. Can an appeal be made to the same faculties on questions
of practical ends? Or by what other faculty is cognizance taken of them?
Questions about ends are, in other words, questions what things are
desirable. The utilitarian doctrine is, that happiness is desirable, and
the only thing desirable, as an end; all other things being only
desirable as means to that end. What ought to be required of this
doctrine--what conditions is it requisite that the doctrine should
fulfil--to make good its claim to be believed?
The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that
people actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that
people hear it: and so of the other sources of our experience. In like
manner, I apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that
anything is desirable, is that people do actually desire it. If the end
which the utilitarian doctrine proposes to itself were not, in theory
and in practice, acknowledged to be an end, nothing could ever convince
any person that it was so. No reason can be given why the general
happiness is desirable, except that each person, so far as he believes
it to be attainable, desires his own happiness. This, however, being a
fact, we have not only all the proof which the case admits of, but all
which it is possible to require, that happiness is a good: that each
person's happiness is a good to that person, and the general happiness,
therefore, a good to the aggregate of all persons. Happiness has made
out its title as _one_ of the ends of conduct, and consequently one of
the criteria of morality.
But it has not, by this alone, proved itself to be the sole criterion.
To do that, it would seem, by the same rule, necessary to show, not only
that people desire happiness, but that they never desire anything else.
Now it is palpable that they do desire things which, in common language,
are decidedly distinguished from happiness. They desire, for example,
virtue, and the absence of vice, no less really than pleasure and the
absence of pain. The desire of virtue is not as universal, but it is as
authentic a fact, as the desire of happiness. And hence the opponents of
the utilitarian standard deem that they have a right to infer that there
are other ends of human action besides happiness, and that happiness is
not the standard of approbation and disapprobation.
But does the utilitarian doctrine deny that people desire virtue, or
maintain that virtue is not a thing to be desired? The very reverse. It
maintains not only that virtue is to be desired, but that it is to be
desired disinterestedly, for itself. Whatever may be the opinion of
utilitarian moralists as to the original conditions by which virtue is
made virtue; however they may believe (as they do) that actions and
dispositions are only virtuous because they promote another end than
virtue; yet this being granted, and it having been decided, from
considerations of this description, what _is_ virtuous, they not only
place virtue at the very head of the things which are good as means to
the ultimate end, but they also recognise as a psychological fact the
possibility of its being, to the individual, a good in itself, without
looking to any end beyond it; and hold, that the mind is not in a right
state, not in a state conformable to Utility, not in the state most
conducive to the general happiness, unless it does love virtue in this
manner--as a thing desirable in itself, even although, in the individual
instance, it should not produce those other desirable consequences which
it tends to produce, and on account of which it is held to be virtue.
This opinion is not, in the smallest degree, a departure from the
Happiness principle. The ingredients of happiness are very various, and
each of them is desirable in itself, and not merely when considered as
swelling an aggregate. The principle of utility does not mean that any
given pleasure, as music, for instance, or any given exemption from
pain, as for example health, are to be looked upon as means to a
collective something termed happiness, and to be desired on that
account. They are desired and desirable in and for themselves; besides
being means, they are a part of the end. Virtue, according to the
utilitarian doctrine, is not naturally and originally part of the end,
but it is capable of becoming so; and in those who love it
disinterestedly it has become so, and is desired and cherished, not as a
means to happiness, but as a part of their happiness.
To illustrate this farther, we may remember that virtue is not the only
thing, originally a means, and which if it were not a means to anything
else, would be and remain indifferent, but which by association with
what it is a means to, comes to be desired for itself, and that too with
the utmost intensity. What, for example, shall we say of the love of
money? There is nothing originally more desirable about money than about
any heap of glittering pebbles. Its worth is solely that of the things
which it will buy; the desires for other things than itself, which it is
a means of gratifying. Yet the love of money is not only one of the
strongest moving forces of human life, but money is, in many cases,
desired in and for itself; the desire to possess it is often stronger
than the desire to use it, and goes on increasing when all the desires
which point to ends beyond it, to be compassed by it, are falling off.
It may be then said truly, that money is desired not for the sake of an
end, but as part of the end. From being a means to happiness, it has
come to be itself a principal ingredient of the individual's conception
of happiness. The same may be said of the majority of the great objects
of human life--power, for example, or fame; except that to each of these
there is a certain amount of immediate pleasure annexed, which has at
least the semblance of being naturally inherent in them; a thing which
cannot be said of money. Still, however, the strongest natural
attraction, both of power and of fame, is the immense aid they give to
the attainment of our other wishes; and it is the strong association
thus generated between them and all our objects of desire, which gives
to the direct desire of them the intensity it often assumes, so as in
some characters to surpass in strength all other desires. In these cases
the means have become a part of the end, and a more important part of it
than any of the things which they are means to. What was once desired as
an instrument for the attainment of happiness, has come to be desired
for its own sake. In being desired for its own sake it is, however,
desired as part of happiness. The person is made, or thinks he would be
made, happy by its mere possession; and is made unhappy by failure to
obtain it. The desire of it is not a different thing from the desire of
happiness, any more than the love of music, or the desire of health.
They are included in happiness. They are some of the elements of which
the desire of happiness is made up. Happiness is not an abstract idea,
but a concrete whole; and these are some of its parts. And the
utilitarian standard sanctions and approves their being so. Life would
be a poor thing, very ill provided with sources of happiness, if there
were not this provision of nature, by which things originally
indifferent, but conducive to, or otherwise associated with, the
satisfaction of our primitive desires, become in themselves sources of
pleasure more valuable than the primitive pleasures, both in permanency,
in the space of human existence that they are capable of covering, and
even in intensity. Virtue, according to the utilitarian conception, is a
good of this description. There was no original desire of it, or motive
to it, save its conduciveness to pleasure, and especially to protection
from pain. But through the association thus formed, it may be felt a
good in itself, and desired as such with as great intensity as any other
good; and with this difference between it and the love of money, of
power, or of fame, that all of these may, and often do, render the
individual noxious to the other members of the society to which he
belongs, whereas there is nothing which makes him so much a blessing to
them as the cultivation of the disinterested, love of virtue. And
consequently, the utilitarian standard, while it tolerates and approves
those other acquired desires, up to the point beyond which they would be
more injurious to the general happiness than promotive of it, enjoins
and requires the cultivation of the love of virtue up to the greatest
strength possible, as being above all things important to the general
happiness.
It results from the preceding considerations, that there is in reality
nothing desired except happiness. Whatever is desired otherwise than as
a means to some end beyond itself, and ultimately to happiness, is
desired as itself a part of happiness, and is not desired for itself
until it has become so. Those who desire virtue for its own sake, desire
it either because the consciousness of it is a pleasure, or because the
consciousness of being without it is a pain, or for both reasons united;
as in truth the pleasure and pain seldom exist separately, but almost
always together, the same person feeling pleasure in the degree of
virtue attained, and pain in not having attained more. If one of these
gave him no pleasure, and the other no pain, he would not love or desire
virtue, or would desire it only for the other benefits which it might
produce to himself or to persons whom he cared for.
We have now, then, an answer to the question, of what sort of proof the
principle of utility is susceptible. If the opinion which I have now
stated is psychologically true--if human nature is so constituted as to
desire nothing which is not either a part of happiness or a means of
happiness, we can have no other proof, and we require no other, that
these are the only things desirable. If so, happiness is the sole end of
human action, and the promotion of it the test by which to judge of all
human conduct; from whence it necessarily follows that it must be the
criterion of morality, since a part is included in the whole.
And now to decide whether this is really so; whether mankind do desire
nothing for itself but that which is a pleasure to them, or of which the
absence is a pain; we have evidently arrived at a question of fact and
experience, dependent, like all similar questions, upon evidence. It can
only be determined by practised self-consciousness and self-observation,
assisted by observation of others. I believe that these sources of
evidence, impartially consulted, will declare that desiring a thing and
finding it pleasant, aversion to it and thinking of it as painful, are
phenomena entirely inseparable, or rather two parts of the same
phenomenon; in strictness of language, two different modes of naming the
same psychological fact: that to think of an object as desirable (unless
for the sake of its consequences), and to think of it as pleasant, are
one and the same thing; and that to desire anything, except in
proportion as the idea of it is pleasant, is a physical and metaphysical
impossibility.
So obvious does this appear to me, that I expect it will hardly be
disputed: and the objection made will be, not that desire can possibly
be directed to anything ultimately except pleasure and exemption from
pain, but that the will is a different thing from desire; that a person
of confirmed virtue, or any other person whose purposes are fixed,
carries out his purposes without any thought of the pleasure he has in
contemplating them, or expects to derive from their fulfilment; and
persists in acting on them, even though these pleasures are much
diminished, by changes in his character or decay of his passive
sensibilities, or are outweighed by the pains which the pursuit of the
purposes may bring upon him. All this I fully admit, and have stated it
elsewhere, as positively and emphatically as any one. Will, the active
phenomenon, is a different thing from desire, the state of passive
sensibility, and though originally an offshoot from it, may in time take
root and detach itself from the parent stock; so much so, that in the
case of an habitual purpose, instead of willing the thing because we
desire it, we often desire it only because we will it. This, however, is
but an instance of that familiar fact, the power of habit, and is nowise
confined to the case of virtuous actions. Many indifferent things, which
men originally did from a motive of some sort, they continue to do from
habit. Sometimes this is done unconsciously, the consciousness coming
only after the action: at other times with conscious volition, but
volition which has become habitual, and is put into operation by the
force of habit, in opposition perhaps to the deliberate preference, as
often happens with those who have contracted habits of vicious or
hurtful indulgence. Third and last comes the case in which the habitual
act of will in the individual instance is not in contradiction to the
general intention prevailing at other times, but in fulfilment of it; as
in the case of the person of confirmed virtue, and of all who pursue
deliberately and consistently any determinate end. The distinction
between will and desire thus understood, is an authentic and highly
important psychological fact; but the fact consists solely in this--that
will, like all other parts of our constitution, is amenable to habit,
and that we may will from habit what we no longer desire for itself, or
desire only because we will it. It is not the less true that will, in
the beginning, is entirely produced by desire; including in that term
the repelling influence of pain as well as the attractive one of
pleasure. Let us take into consideration, no longer the person who has a
confirmed will to do right, but him in whom that virtuous will is still
feeble, conquerable by temptation, and not to be fully relied on; by
what means can it be strengthened? How can the will to be virtuous,
where it does not exist in sufficient force, be implanted or awakened?
Only by making the person _desire_ virtue--by making him think of it in
a pleasurable light, or of its absence in a painful one. It is by
associating the doing right with pleasure, or the doing wrong with pain,
or by eliciting and impressing and bringing home to the person's
experience the pleasure naturally involved in the one or the pain in the
other, that it is possible to call forth that will to be virtuous,
which, when confirmed, acts without any thought of either pleasure or
pain. Will is the child of desire, and passes out of the dominion of its
parent only to come under that of habit. That which is the result of
habit affords no presumption of being intrinsically good; and there
would be no reason for wishing that the purpose of virtue should become
independent of pleasure and pain, were it not that the influence of the
pleasurable and painful associations which prompt to virtue is not
sufficiently to be depended on for unerring constancy of action until it
has acquired the support of habit. Both in feeling and in conduct, habit
is the only thing which imparts certainty; and it is because of the
importance to others of being able to rely absolutely on one's feelings
and conduct, and to oneself of being able to rely on one's own, that the
will to do right ought to be cultivated into this habitual independence.
In other words, this state of the will is a means to good, not
intrinsically a good; and does not contradict the doctrine that nothing
is a good to human beings but in so far as it is either itself
pleasurable, or a means of attaining pleasure or averting pain.
But if this doctrine be true, the principle of utility is proved.
Whether it is so or not, must now be left to the consideration of the
thoughtful reader.
In all ages of speculation, one of the strongest obstacles to the
reception of the doctrine that Utility or Happiness is the criterion of
right and wrong, has been drawn from the idea of Justice, The powerful
sentiment, and apparently clear perception, which that word recalls with
a rapidity and certainty resembling an instinct, have seemed to the
majority of thinkers to point to an inherent quality in things; to show
that the Just must have an existence in Nature as something
absolute-generically distinct from every variety of the Expedient, and,
in idea, opposed to it, though (as is commonly acknowledged) never, in
the long run, disjoined from it in fact.
In the case of this, as of our other moral sentiments, there is no
necessary connexion between the question of its origin, and that of its
binding force. That a feeling is bestowed on us by Nature, does not
necessarily legitimate all its promptings. The feeling of justice might
be a peculiar instinct, and might yet require, like our other instincts,
to be controlled and enlightened by a higher reason. If we have
intellectual instincts, leading us to judge in a particular way, as well
as animal instincts that prompt us to act in a particular way, there is
no necessity that the former should be more infallible in their sphere
than the latter in theirs: it may as well happen that wrong judgments
are occasionally suggested by those, as wrong actions by these. But
though it is one thing to believe that we have natural feelings of
justice, and another to acknowledge them as an ultimate criterion of
conduct, these two opinions are very closely connected in point of fact.
Mankind are always predisposed to believe that any subjective feeling,
not otherwise accounted for, is a revelation of some objective reality.
Our present object is to determine whether the reality, to which the
feeling of justice corresponds, is one which needs any such special
revelation; whether the justice or injustice of an action is a thing
intrinsically peculiar, and distinct from all its other qualities, or
only a combination of certain of those qualities, presented under a
peculiar aspect. For the purpose of this inquiry, it is practically
important to consider whether the feeling itself, of justice and
injustice, is _sui generis_ like our sensations of colour and taste, or
a derivative feeling, formed by a combination of others. And this it is
the more essential to examine, as people are in general willing enough
to allow, that objectively the dictates of justice coincide with a part
of the field of General Expediency; but inasmuch as the subjective
mental feeling of Justice is different from that which commonly attaches
to simple expediency, and, except in extreme cases of the latter, is far
more imperative in its demands, people find it difficult to see, in
Justice, only a particular kind or branch of general utility, and think
that its superior binding force requires a totally different origin.
To throw light upon this question, it is necessary to attempt to
ascertain what is the distinguishing character of justice, or of
injustice: what is the quality, or whether there is any quality,
attributed in common to all modes of conduct designated as unjust (for
justice, like many other moral attributes, is best defined by its
opposite), and distinguishing them from such modes of conduct as are
disapproved, but without having that particular epithet of
disapprobation applied to them. If, in everything which men are
accustomed to characterize as just or unjust, some one common attribute
or collection of attributes is always present, we may judge whether this
particular attribute or combination of attributes would be capable of
gathering round it a sentiment of that peculiar character and intensity
by virtue of the general laws of our emotional constitution, or whether
the sentiment is inexplicable, and requires to be regarded as a special
provision of Nature. If we find the former to be the case, we shall, in
resolving this question, have resolved also the main problem: if the
latter, we shall have to seek for some other mode of investigating it.
To find the common attributes of a variety of objects, it is necessary
to begin, by surveying the objects themselves in the concrete. Let us
therefore advert successively to the various modes of action, and
arrangements of human affairs, which are classed, by universal or widely
spread opinion, as Just or as Unjust. The things well known to excite
the sentiments associated with those names, are of a very multifarious
character. I shall pass them rapidly in review, without studying any
particular arrangement.
In the first place, it is mostly considered unjust to deprive any one
of his personal liberty, his property, or any other thing which belongs
to him by law. Here, therefore, is one instance of the application of
the terms just and unjust in a perfectly definite sense, namely, that it
is just to respect, unjust to violate, the _legal rights_ of any one.
But this judgment admits of several exceptions, arising from the other
forms in which the notions of justice and injustice present themselves.
For example, the person who suffers the deprivation may (as the phrase
is) have _forfeited_ the rights which he is so deprived of: a case to
which we shall return presently. But also,
Secondly; the legal rights of which he is deprived, may be rights which
_ought_ not to have belonged to him; in other words, the law which
confers on him these rights, may be a bad law. When it is so, or when
(which is the same thing for our purpose) it is supposed to be so,
opinions will differ as to the justice or injustice of infringing it.
Some maintain that no law, however bad, ought to be disobeyed by an
individual citizen; that his opposition to it, if shown at all, should
only be shown in endeavouring to get it altered by competent authority.
This opinion (which condemns many of the most illustrious benefactors of
mankind, and would often protect pernicious institutions against the
only weapons which, in the state of things existing at the time, have
any chance of succeeding against them) is defended, by those who hold
it, on grounds of expediency; principally on that of the importance, to
the common interest of mankind, of maintaining inviolate the sentiment
of submission to law. Other persons, again, hold the directly contrary
opinion, that any law, judged to be bad, may blamelessly be disobeyed,
even though it be not judged to be unjust, but only inexpedient; while
others would confine the licence of disobedience to the case of unjust
laws: but again, some say, that all laws which are inexpedient are
unjust; since every law imposes some restriction on the natural liberty
of mankind, which restriction is an injustice, unless legitimated by
tending to their good. Among these diversities of opinion, it seems to
be universally admitted that there may be unjust laws, and that law,
consequently, is not the ultimate criterion of justice, but may give to
one person a benefit, or impose on another an evil, which justice
condemns. When, however, a law is thought to be unjust, it seems always
to be regarded as being so in the same way in which a breach of law is
unjust, namely, by infringing somebody's right; which, as it cannot in
this case be a legal right, receives a different appellation, and is
called a moral right. We may say, therefore, that a second case of
injustice consists in taking or withholding from any person that to
which he has a _moral right_.
Thirdly, it is universally considered just that each person should
obtain that (whether good or evil) which he _deserves_; and unjust that
he should obtain a good, or be made to undergo an evil, which he does
not deserve. This is, perhaps, the clearest and most emphatic form in
which the idea of justice is conceived by the general mind. As it
involves the notion of desert, the question arises, what constitutes
desert? Speaking in a general way, a person is understood to deserve
good if he does right, evil if he does wrong; and in a more particular
sense, to deserve good from those to whom he does or has done good, and
evil from those to whom he does or has done evil. The precept of
returning good for evil has never been regarded as a case of the
fulfilment of justice, but as one in which the claims of justice are
waived, in obedience to other considerations.
Fourthly, it is confessedly unjust to _break faith_ with any one: to
violate an engagement, either express or implied, or disappoint
expectations raised by our own conduct, at least if we have raised those
expectations knowingly and voluntarily. Like the other obligations of
justice already spoken of, this one is not regarded as absolute, but as
capable of being overruled by a stronger obligation of justice on the
other side; or by such conduct on the part of the person concerned as is
deemed to absolve us from our obligation to him, and to constitute a
_forfeiture_ of the benefit which he has been led to expect.
Fifthly, it is, by universal admission, inconsistent with justice to be
_partial_; to show favour or preference to one person over another, in
matters to which favour and preference do not properly apply.
Impartiality, however, does not seem to be regarded as a duty in itself,
but rather as instrumental to some other duty; for it is admitted that
favour and preference are not always censurable, and indeed the cases in
which they are condemned are rather the exception than the rule. A
person would be more likely to be blamed than applauded for giving his
family or friends no superiority in good offices over strangers, when he
could do so without violating any other duty; and no one thinks it
unjust to seek one person in preference to another as a friend,
connexion, or companion. Impartiality where rights are concerned is of
course obligatory, but this is involved in the more general obligation
of giving to every one his right. A tribunal, for example, must be
impartial, because it is bound to award, without regard to any other
consideration, a disputed object to the one of two parties who has the
right to it. There are other cases in which impartiality means, being
solely influenced by desert; as with those who, in the capacity of
judges, preceptors, or parents, administer reward and punishment as
such. There are cases, again, in which it means, being solely influenced
by consideration for the public interest; as in making a selection among
candidates for a Government employment. Impartiality, in short, as an
obligation of justice, may be said to mean, being exclusively influenced
by the considerations which it is supposed ought to influence the
particular case in hand; and resisting the solicitation of any motives
which prompt to conduct different from what those considerations would
dictate.
Nearly allied to the idea of impartiality, is that of _equality_; which
often enters as a component part both into the conception of justice and
into the practice of it, and, in the eyes of many persons, constitutes
its essence. But in this, still more than in any other case, the notion
of justice varies in different persons, and always conforms in its
variations to their notion of utility. Each person maintains that
equality is the dictate of justice, except where he thinks that
expediency requires inequality. The justice of giving equal protection
to the rights of all, is maintained by those who support the most
outrageous inequality in the rights themselves. Even in slave countries
it is theoretically admitted that the rights of the slave, such as they
are, ought to be as sacred as those of the master; and that a tribunal
which fails to enforce them with equal strictness is wanting in justice;
while, at the same time, institutions which leave to the slave scarcely
any rights to enforce, are not deemed unjust, because they are not
deemed inexpedient. Those who think that utility requires distinctions
of rank, do not consider it unjust that riches and social privileges
should be unequally dispensed; but those who think this inequality
inexpedient, think it unjust also. Whoever thinks that government is
necessary, sees no injustice in as much inequality as is constituted by
giving to the magistrate powers not granted to other people. Even among
those who hold levelling doctrines, there are as many questions of
justice as there are differences of opinion about expediency. Some
Communists consider it unjust that the produce of the labour of the
community should be shared on any other principle than that of exact
equality; others think it just that those should receive most whose
needs are greatest; while others hold that those who work harder, or who
produce more, or whose services are more valuable to the community, may
justly claim a larger quota in the division of the produce. And the
sense of natural justice may be plausibly appealed to in behalf of every
one of these opinions.
Among so many diverse applications of the term Justice, which yet is not
regarded as ambiguous, it is a matter of some difficulty to seize the
mental link which holds them together, and on which the moral sentiment
adhering to the term essentially depends. Perhaps, in this
embarrassment, some help may be derived from the history of the word, as
indicated by its etymology.
In most, if not in all languages, the etymology of the word which
corresponds to Just, points to an origin connected either with positive
law, or with that which was in most cases the primitive form of
law-authoritative custom. _Justum_ is a form of _jussum_, that which has
been ordered. _Jus_ is of the same origin. _Dichanou_ comes from
_dichae_, of which the principal meaning, at least in the historical
ages of Greece, was a suit at law. Originally, indeed, it meant only the
mode or _manner_ of doing things, but it early came to mean the
_prescribed_ manner; that which the recognized authorities, patriarchal,
judicial, or political, would enforce. _Recht_, from which came _right_
and _righteous_, is synonymous with law. The original meaning, indeed,
of _recht_ did not point to law, but to physical straightness; as
_wrong_ and its Latin equivalents meant twisted or tortuous; and from
this it is argued that right did not originally mean law, but on the
contrary law meant right. But however this may be, the fact that _recht_
and _droit_ became restricted in their meaning to positive law, although
much which is not required by law is equally necessary to moral
straightness or rectitude, is as significant of the original character
of moral ideas as if the derivation had been the reverse way. The courts
of justice, the administration of justice, are the courts and the
administration of law. _La justice_, in French, is the established term
for judicature. There can, I think, be no doubt that the _idée mère_,
the primitive element, in the formation of the notion of justice, was
conformity to law. It constituted the entire idea among the Hebrews, up
to the birth of Christianity; as might be expected in the case of a
people whose laws attempted to embrace all subjects on which precepts
were required, and who believed those laws to be a direct emanation from
the Supreme Being. But other nations, and in particular the Greeks and
Romans, who knew that their laws had been made originally, and still
continued to be made, by men, were not afraid to admit that those men
might make bad laws; might do, by law, the same things, and from the
same motives, which, if done by individuals without the sanction of law,
would be called unjust. And hence the sentiment of injustice came to be
attached, not to all violations of law, but only to violations of such
laws as _ought_ to exist, including such as ought to exist but do not;
and to laws themselves, if supposed to be contrary to what ought to be
law. In this manner the idea of law and of its injunctions was still
predominant in the notion of justice, even when the laws actually in
force ceased to be accepted as the standard of it.
It is true that mankind consider the idea of justice and its obligations
as applicable to many things which neither are, nor is it desired that
they should be, regulated by law. Nobody desires that laws should
interfere with the whole detail of private life; yet every one allows
that in all daily conduct a person may and does show himself to be
either just or unjust. But even here, the idea of the breach of what
ought to be law, still lingers in a modified shape. It would always give
us pleasure, and chime in with our feelings of fitness, that acts which
we deem unjust should be punished, though we do not always think it
expedient that this should be done by the tribunals. We forego that
gratification on account of incidental inconveniences. We should be glad
to see just conduct enforced and injustice repressed, even in the
minutest details, if we were not, with reason, afraid of trusting the
magistrate with so unlimited an amount of power over individuals. When
we think that a person is bound in justice to do a thing, it is an
ordinary form of language to say, that he ought to be compelled to do
it. We should be gratified to see the obligation enforced by anybody who
had the power. If we see that its enforcement by law would be
inexpedient, we lament the impossibility, we consider the impunity given
to injustice as an evil, and strive to make amends for it by bringing a
strong expression of our own and the public disapprobation to bear upon
the offender. Thus the idea of legal constraint is still the generating
idea of the notion of justice, though undergoing several transformations
before that notion, as it exists in an advanced state of society,
becomes complete.
The above is, I think, a true account, as far as it goes, of the origin
and progressive growth of the idea of justice. But we must observe, that
it contains, as yet, nothing to distinguish that obligation from moral
obligation in general. For the truth is, that the idea of penal
sanction, which is the essence of law, enters not only into the
conception of injustice, but into that of any kind of wrong. We do not
call anything wrong, unless we mean to imply that a person ought to be
punished in some way or other for doing it; if not by law, by the
opinion of his fellow creatures; if not by opinion, by the reproaches of
his own conscience. This seems the real turning point of the distinction
between morality and simple expediency. It is a part of the notion of
Duty in every one of its forms, that a person may rightfully be
compelled to fulfil it. Duty is a thing which may be _exacted_ from a
person, as one exacts a debt. Unless we think that it might be exacted
from him, we do not call it his duty. Reasons of prudence, or the
interest of other people, may militate against actually exacting it; but
the person himself, it is clearly understood, would not be entitled to
complain. There are other things, on the contrary, which we wish that
people should do, which we like or admire them for doing, perhaps
dislike or despise them for not doing, but yet admit that they are not
bound to do; it is not a case of moral obligation; we do not blame them,
that is, we do not think that they are proper objects of punishment. How
we come by these ideas of deserving and not deserving punishment, will
appear, perhaps, in the sequel; but I think there is no doubt that this
distinction lies at the bottom of the notions of right and wrong; that
we call any conduct wrong, or employ instead, some other term of dislike
or disparagement, according as we think that the person ought, or ought
not, to be punished for it; and we say that it would be right to do so
and so, or merely that it would be desirable or laudable, according as
we would wish to see the person whom it concerns, compelled or only
persuaded and exhorted, to act in that manner.[C]
This, therefore, being the characteristic difference which marks off,
not justice, but morality in general, from the remaining provinces of
Expediency and Worthiness; the character is still to be sought which
distinguishes justice from other branches of morality. Now it is known
that ethical writers divide moral duties into two classes, denoted by
the ill-chosen expressions, duties of perfect and of imperfect
obligation; the latter being those in which, though the act is
obligatory, the particular occasions of performing it are left to our
choice; as in the case of charity or beneficence, which we are indeed
bound to practise, but not towards any definite person, nor at any
prescribed time. In the more precise language of philosophic jurists,
duties of perfect obligation are those duties in virtue of which a
correlative right resides in some person or persons; duties of imperfect
obligation are those moral obligations which do not give birth to any
right. I think it will be found that this distinction exactly coincides
with that which exists between justice and the other obligations of
morality. In our survey of the various popular acceptations of justice,
the term appeared generally to involve the idea of a personal right--a
claim on the part of one or more individuals, like that which the law
gives when it confers a proprietary or other legal right. Whether the
injustice consists in depriving a person of a possession, or in breaking
faith with him, or in treating him worse than he deserves, or worse than
other people who have no greater claims, in each case the supposition
implies two things--a wrong done, and some assignable person who is
wronged. Injustice may also be done by treating a person better than
others; but the wrong in this case is to his competitors, who are also
assignable persons. It seems to me that this feature in the case--a
right in some person, correlative to the moral obligation--constitutes
the specific difference between justice, and generosity or beneficence.
Justice implies something which it is not only right to do, and wrong
not to do, but which some individual person can claim from us as his
moral right. No one has a moral right to our generosity or beneficence,
because we are not morally bound to practise those virtues towards any
given individual. And it will be found, with respect to this as with
respect to every correct definition, that the instances which seem to
conflict with it are those which most confirm it. For if a moralist
attempts, as some have done, to make out that mankind generally, though
not any given individual, have a right to all the good we can do them,
he at once, by that thesis, includes generosity and beneficence within
the category of justice. He is obliged to say, that our utmost exertions
are due to our fellow creatures, thus assimilating them to a debt; or
that nothing less can be a sufficient _return_ for what society does for
us, thus classing the case as one of gratitude; both of which are
acknowledged cases of justice. Wherever there is a right, the case is
one of justice, and not of the virtue of beneficence: and whoever does
not place the distinction between justice and morality in general where
we have now placed it, will be found to make no distinction between them
at all, but to merge all morality in justice.
Having thus endeavoured to determine the distinctive elements which
enter into the composition of the idea of justice, we are ready to enter
on the inquiry, whether the feeling, which accompanies the idea, is
attached to it by a special dispensation of nature, or whether it could
have grown up, by any known laws, out of the idea itself; and in
particular, whether it can have originated in considerations of general
expediency.
I conceive that the sentiment itself does not arise from anything which
would commonly, or correctly, be termed an idea of expediency; but that,
though the sentiment does not, whatever is moral in it does.
We have seen that the two essential ingredients in the sentiment of
justice are, the desire to punish a person who has done harm, and the
knowledge or belief that there is some definite individual or
individuals to whom harm has been done.
Now it appears to me, that the desire to punish a person who has done
harm to some individual, is a spontaneous outgrowth from two sentiments,
both in the highest degree natural, and which either are or resemble
instincts; the impulse of self-defence, and the feeling of sympathy.
It is natural to resent, and to repel or retaliate, any harm done or
attempted against ourselves, or against those with whom we sympathize.
The origin of this sentiment it is not necessary here to discuss.
Whether it be an instinct or a result of intelligence, it is, we know,
common to all animal nature; for every animal tries to hurt those who
have hurt, or who it thinks are about to hurt, itself or its young.
Human beings, on this point, only differ from other animals in two
particulars. First, in being capable of sympathizing, not solely with
their offspring, or, like some of the more noble animals, with some
superior animal who is kind to them, but with all human, and even with
all sentient beings. Secondly, in having a more developed intelligence,
which gives a wider range to the whole of their sentiments, whether
self-regarding or sympathetic. By virtue of his superior intelligence,
even apart from his superior range of sympathy, a human being is capable
of apprehending a community of interest between himself and the human
society of which he forms a part, such that any conduct which threatens
the security of the society generally, is threatening to his own, and
calls forth his instinct (if instinct it be) of self-defence. The same
superiority of intelligence, joined to the power of sympathizing with
human beings generally, enables him to attach himself to the collective
idea of his tribe, his country, or mankind, in such a manner that any
act hurtful to them rouses his instinct of sympathy, and urges him to
resistance.
The sentiment of justice, in that one of its elements which consists of
the desire to punish, is thus, I conceive, the natural feeling of
retaliation or vengeance, rendered by intellect and sympathy applicable
to those injuries, that is, to those hurts, which wound us through, or
in common with, society at large. This sentiment, in itself, has nothing
moral in it; what is moral is, the exclusive subordination of it to the
social sympathies, so as to wait on and obey their call. For the natural
feeling tends to make us resent indiscriminately whatever any one does
that is disagreeable to us; but when moralized by the social feeling, it
only acts in the directions conformable to the general good; just
persons resenting a hurt to society, though not otherwise a hurt to
themselves, and not resenting a hurt to themselves, however painful,
unless it be of the kind which society has a common interest with them
in the repression of.
It is no objection against this doctrine to say, that when we feel our
sentiment of justice outraged, we are not thinking of society at large,
or of any collective interest, but only of the individual case. It is
common enough certainly, though the reverse of commendable, to feel
resentment merely because we have suffered pain; but a person whose
resentment is really a moral feeling, that is, who considers whether an
act is blameable before he allows himself to resent it--such a person,
though he may not say expressly to himself that he is standing up for
the interest of society, certainly does feel that he is asserting a rule
which is for the benefit of others as well as for his own. If he is not
feeling this--if he is regarding the act solely as it affects him
individually--he is not consciously just; he is not concerning himself
about the justice of his actions. This is admitted even by
anti-utilitarian moralists. When Kant (as before remarked) propounds as
the fundamental principle of morals, 'So act, that thy rule of conduct
might be adopted as a law by all rational beings,' he virtually
acknowledges that the interest of mankind collectively, or at least of
mankind indiscriminately, must be in the mind of the agent when
conscientiously deciding on the morality of the act. Otherwise he uses
words without a meaning: for, that a rule even of utter selfishness
could not _possibly_ be adopted by all rational beings--that there is
any insuperable obstacle in the nature of things to its adoption--cannot
be even plausibly maintained. To give any meaning to Kant's principle,
the sense put upon it must be, that we ought to shape our conduct by a
rule which all rational beings might adopt _with benefit to their
collective interest_.
To recapitulate: the idea of justice supposes two things; a rule of
conduct, and a sentiment which sanctions the rule. The first must be
supposed common to all mankind, and intended for their good. The other
(the sentiment) is a desire that punishment may be suffered by those who
infringe the rule. There is involved, in addition, the conception of
some definite person who suffers by the infringement; whose rights (to
use the expression appropriated to the case) are violated by it. And the
sentiment of justice appears to me to be, the animal desire to repel or
retaliate a hurt or damage to oneself, or to those with whom one
sympathizes, widened so as to include all persons, by the human capacity
of enlarged sympathy, and the human conception of intelligent
self-interest. From the latter elements, the feeling derives its
morality; from the former, its peculiar impressiveness, and energy of
self-assertion.
I have, throughout, treated the idea of a _right_ residing in the
injured person, and violated by the injury, not as a separate element in
the composition of the idea and sentiment, but as one of the forms in
which the other two elements clothe themselves. These elements are, a
hurt to some assignable person or persons on the one hand, and a demand
for punishment on the other. An examination of our own minds, I think,
will show, that these two things include all that we mean when we speak
of violation of a right. When we call anything a person's right, we mean
that he has a valid claim on society to protect him in the possession
of it, either by the force of law, or by that of education and opinion.
If he has what we consider a sufficient claim, on whatever account, to
have something guaranteed to him by society, we say that he has a right
to it. If we desire to prove that anything does not belong to him by
right, we think this done as soon as it is admitted that society ought
not to take measures for securing it to him, but should leave it to
chance, or to his own exertions. Thus, a person is said to have a right
to what he can earn in fair professional competition; because society
ought not to allow any other person to hinder him from endeavouring to
earn in that manner as much as he can. But he has not a right to three
hundred a-year, though he may happen to be earning it; because society
is not called on to provide that he shall earn that sum. On the
contrary, if he owns ten thousand pounds three per cent. stock, he _has_
a right to three hundred a-year; because society has come under an
obligation to provide him with an income of that amount.
To have a right, then, is, I conceive, to have something which society
ought to defend me in the possession of. If the objector goes on to ask
why it ought, I can give him no other reason than general utility. If
that expression does not seem to convey a sufficient feeling of the
strength of the obligation, nor to account for the peculiar energy of
the feeling, it is because there goes to the composition of the
sentiment, not a rational only but also an animal element, the thirst
for retaliation; and this thirst derives its intensity, as well as its
moral justification, from the extraordinarily important and impressive
kind of utility which is concerned. The interest involved is that of
security, to every one's feelings the most vital of all interests.
Nearly all other earthly benefits are needed by one person, not needed
by another; and many of them can, if necessary, be cheerfully foregone,
or replaced by something else; but security no human being can possibly
do without; on it we depend for all our immunity from evil, and for the
whole value of all and every good, beyond the passing moment; since
nothing but the gratification of the instant could be of any worth to
us, if we could be deprived of everything the next instant by whoever
was momentarily stronger than ourselves. Now this most indispensable of
all necessaries, after physical nutriment, cannot be had, unless the
machinery for providing it is kept unintermittedly in active play. Our
notion, therefore, of the claim we have on our fellow creatures to join
in making safe for us the very groundwork of our existence, gathers
feelings round it so much more intense than those concerned in any of
the more common cases of utility, that the difference in degree (as is
often the case in psychology) becomes a real difference in kind. The
claim assumes that character of absoluteness, that apparent infinity,
and incommensurability with all other considerations, which constitute
the distinction between the feeling of right and wrong and that of
ordinary expediency and inexpediency. The feelings concerned are so
powerful, and we count so positively on finding a responsive feeling in
others (all being alike interested), that _ought_ and _should_ grow into
_must_, and recognized indispensability becomes a moral necessity,
analogous to physical, and often not inferior to it in binding force.
If the preceding analysis, or something resembling it, be not the
correct account of the notion of justice; if justice be totally
independent of utility, and be a standard _per se_, which the mind can
recognize by simple introspection of itself; it is hard to understand
why that internal oracle is so ambiguous, and why so many things appear
either just or unjust, according to the light in which they are
regarded. We are continually informed that Utility is an uncertain
standard, which every different person interprets differently, and that
there is no safety but in the immutable, ineffaceable, and unmistakeable
dictates of Justice, which carry their evidence in themselves, and are
independent of the fluctuations of opinion. One would suppose from this
that on questions of justice there could be no controversy; that if we
take that for our rule, its application to any given case could leave us
in as little doubt as a mathematical demonstration. So far is this from
being the fact, that there is as much difference of opinion, and as
fierce discussion, about what is just, as about what is useful to
society. Not only have different nations and individuals different
notions of justice, but, in the mind of one and the same individual,
justice is not some one rule, principle, or maxim, but many, which do
not always coincide in their dictates, and in choosing between which, he
is guided either by some extraneous standard, or by his own personal
predilections.
For instance, there are some who say, that it is unjust to punish any
one for the sake of example to others; that punishment is just, only
when intended for the good of the sufferer himself. Others maintain the
extreme reverse, contending that to punish persons who have attained
years of discretion, for their own benefit, is despotism and injustice,
since if the matter at issue is solely their own good, no one has a
right to control their own judgment of it; but that they may justly be
punished to prevent evil to others, this being an exercise of the
legitimate right of self-defence. Mr. Owen, again, affirms that it is
unjust to punish at all; for the criminal did not make his own
character; his education, and the circumstances which surround him, have
made him a criminal, and for these he is not responsible. All these
opinions are extremely plausible; and so long as the question is argued
as one of justice simply, without going down to the principles which lie
under justice and are the source of its authority, I am unable to see
how any of these reasoners can be refuted. For, in truth, every one of
the three builds upon rules of justice confessedly true. The first
appeals to the acknowledged injustice of singling out an individual, and
making him a sacrifice, without his consent, for other people's benefit.
The second relies on the acknowledged justice of self-defence, and the
admitted injustice of forcing one person to conform to another's notions
of what constitutes his good. The Owenite invokes the admitted
principle, that it is unjust to punish any one for what he cannot help.
Each is triumphant so long as he is not compelled to take into
consideration any other maxims of justice than the one he has selected;
but as soon as their several maxims are brought face to face, each
disputant seems to have exactly as much to say for himself as the
others. No one of them can carry out his own notion of justice without
trampling upon another equally binding. These are difficulties; they
have always been felt to be such; and many devices have been invented to
turn rather than to overcome them. As a refuge from the last of the
three, men imagined what they called the freedom of the will; fancying
that they could not justify punishing a man whose will is in a
thoroughly hateful state, unless it be supposed to have come into that
state through no influence of anterior circumstances. To escape from the
other difficulties, a favourite contrivance has been the fiction of a
contract, whereby at some unknown period all the members of society
engaged to obey the laws, and consented to be punished for any
disobedience to them; thereby giving to their legislators the right,
which it is assumed they would not otherwise have had, of punishing
them, either for their own good or for that of society. This happy
thought was considered to get rid of the whole difficulty, and to
legitimate the infliction of punishment, in virtue of another received
maxim of justice, _volenti non fit injuria_; that is not unjust which is
done with the consent of the person who is supposed to be hurt by it. I
need hardly remark, that even if the consent were not a mere fiction,
this maxim is not superior in authority to the others which it is
brought in to supersede. It is, on the contrary, an instructive specimen
of the loose and irregular manner in which supposed principles of
justice grow up. This particular one evidently came into use as a help
to the coarse exigencies of courts of law, which are sometimes obliged
to be content with very uncertain presumptions, on account of the
greater evils which would often arise from any attempt on their part to
cut finer. But even courts of law are not able to adhere consistently to
the maxim, for they allow voluntary engagements to be set aside on the
ground of fraud, and sometimes on that of mere mistake or
misinformation.
Again, when the legitimacy of inflicting punishment is admitted, how
many conflicting conceptions of justice come to light in discussing the
proper apportionment of punishment to offences. No rule on this subject
recommends itself so strongly to the primitive and spontaneous sentiment
of justice, as the _lex talionis_, an eye for an eye and a tooth for a
tooth. Though this principle of the Jewish and of the Mahomedan law has
been generally abandoned in Europe as a practical maxim, there is, I
suspect, in most minds, a secret hankering after it; and when
retribution accidentally falls on an offender in that precise shape, the
general feeling of satisfaction evinced, bears witness how natural is
the sentiment to which this repayment in kind is acceptable. With many
the test of justice in penal infliction is that the punishment should be
proportioned to the offence; meaning that it should be exactly measured
by the moral guilt of the culprit (whatever be their standard for
measuring moral guilt): the consideration, what amount of punishment is
necessary to deter from the offence, having nothing to do with the
question of justice, in their estimation: while there are others to whom
that consideration is all in all; who maintain that it is not just, at
least for man, to inflict on a fellow creature, whatever may be his
offences, any amount of suffering beyond the least that will suffice to
prevent him from repeating, and others from imitating, his misconduct.
To take another example from a subject already once referred to. In a
co-operative industrial association, is it just or not that talent or
skill should give a title to superior remuneration? On the negative side
of the question it is argued, that whoever does the best he can,
deserves equally well, and ought not in justice to be put in a position
of inferiority for no fault of his own; that superior abilities have
already advantages more than enough, in the admiration they excite, the
personal influence they command, and the internal sources of
satisfaction attending them, without adding to these a superior share of
the world's goods; and that society is bound in justice rather to make
compensation to the less favoured, for this unmerited inequality of
advantages, than to aggravate it. On the contrary side it is contended,
that society receives more from the more efficient labourer; that his
services being more useful, society owes him a larger return for them;
that a greater share of the joint result is actually his work, and not
to allow his claim to it is a kind of robbery; that if he is only to
receive as much as others, he can only be justly required to produce as
much, and to give a smaller amount of time and exertion, proportioned to
his superior efficiency. Who shall decide between these appeals to
conflicting principles of justice? Justice has in this case two sides to
it, which it is impossible to bring into harmony, and the two disputants
have chosen opposite sides; the one looks to what it is just that the
individual should receive, the other to what it is just that the
community should give. Each, from his own point of view, is
unanswerable; and any choice between them, on grounds of justice, must
be perfectly arbitrary. Social utility alone can decide the preference.
How many, again, and how irreconcileable, are the standards of justice
to which reference is made in discussing the repartition of taxation.
One opinion is, that payment to the State should be in numerical
proportion to pecuniary means. Others think that justice dictates what
they term graduated taxation; taking a higher percentage from those who
have more to spare. In point of natural justice a strong case might be
made for disregarding means altogether, and taking the same absolute sum
(whenever it could be got) from every one: as the subscribers to a mess,
or to a club, all pay the same sum for the same privileges, whether they
can all equally afford it or not. Since the protection (it might be
said) of law and government is afforded to, and is equally required by,
all, there is no injustice in making all buy it at the same price. It is
reckoned justice, not injustice, that a dealer should charge to all
customers the same price for the same article, not a price varying
according to their means of payment. This doctrine, as applied to
taxation, finds no advocates, because it conflicts strongly with men's
feelings of humanity and perceptions of social expediency; but the
principle of justice which it invokes is as true and as binding as those
which can be appealed to against it. Accordingly, it exerts a tacit
influence on the line of defence employed for other modes of assessing
taxation. People feel obliged to argue that the State does more for the
rich than for the poor, as a justification for its taking more from
them: though this is in reality not true, for the rich would be far
better able to protect themselves, in the absence of law or government,
than the poor, and indeed would probably be successful in converting the
poor into their slaves. Others, again, so far defer to the same
conception of justice, as to maintain that all should pay an equal
capitation tax for the protection of their persons (these being of equal
value to all), and an unequal tax for the protection of their property,
which is unequal. To this others reply, that the all of one man is as
valuable to him as the all of another. From these confusions there is no
other mode of extrication than the utilitarian.
Is, then, the difference between the Just and the Expedient a merely
imaginary distinction? Have mankind been under a delusion in thinking
that justice is a more sacred thing than policy, and that the latter
ought only to be listened to after the former has been satisfied? By no
means. The exposition we have given of the nature and origin of the
sentiment, recognises a real distinction; and no one of those who
profess the most sublime contempt for the consequences of actions as an
element in their morality, attaches more importance to the distinction
than I do. While I dispute the pretensions of any theory which sets up
an imaginary standard of justice not grounded on utility, I account the
justice which is grounded on utility to be the chief part, and
incomparably the most sacred and binding part, of all morality. Justice
is a name for certain classes of moral rules, which concern the
essentials of human well-being more nearly, and are therefore of more
absolute obligation, than any other rules for the guidance of life; and
the notion which we have found to be of the essence of the idea of
justice, that of a right residing in an individual, implies and
testifies to this more binding obligation.
The moral rules which forbid mankind to hurt one another (in which we
must never forget to include wrongful interference with each other's
freedom) are more vital to human well-being than any maxims, however
important, which only point out the best mode of managing some
department of human affairs. They have also the peculiarity, that they
are the main element in determining the whole of the social feelings of
mankind. It is their observance which alone preserves peace among human
beings: if obedience to them were not the rule, and disobedience the
exception, every one would see in every one else a probable enemy,
against whom he must be perpetually guarding himself. What is hardly
less important, these are the precepts which mankind have the strongest
and the most direct inducements for impressing upon one another. By
merely giving to each other prudential instruction or exhortation, they
may gain, or think they gain, nothing: in inculcating on each other the
duty of positive beneficence they have an unmistakeable interest, but
far less in degree: a person may possibly not need the benefits of
others; but he always needs that they should not do him hurt. Thus the
moralities which protect every individual from being harmed by others,
either directly or by being hindered in his freedom of pursuing his own
good, are at once those which he himself has most at heart, and those
which he has the strongest interest in publishing and enforcing by word
and deed. It is by a person's observance of these, that his fitness to
exist as one of the fellowship of human beings, is tested and decided;
for on that depends his being a nuisance or not to those with whom he is
in contact. Now it is these moralities primarily, which compose the
obligations of justice. The most marked cases of injustice, and those
which give the tone to the feeling of repugnance which characterizes the
sentiment, are acts of wrongful aggression, or wrongful exercise of
power over some one; the next are those which consist in wrongfully
withholding from him something which is his due; in both cases,
inflicting on him a positive hurt, either in the form of direct
suffering, or of the privation of some good which he had reasonable
ground, either of a physical or of a social kind, for counting upon.
The same powerful motives which command the observance of these primary
moralities, enjoin the punishment of those who violate them; and as the
impulses of self-defence, of defence of others, and of vengeance, are
all called forth against such persons, retribution, or evil for evil,
becomes closely connected with the sentiment of justice, and is
universally included in the idea. Good for good is also one of the
dictates of justice; and this, though its social utility is evident, and
though it carries with it a natural human feeling, has not at first
sight that obvious connexion with hurt or injury, which, existing in the
most elementary cases of just and unjust, is the source of the
characteristic intensity of the sentiment. But the connexion, though
less obvious, is not less real. He who accepts benefits, and denies a
return of them when needed, inflicts a real hurt, by disappointing one
of the most natural and reasonable of expectations, and one which he
must at least tacitly have encouraged, otherwise the benefits would
seldom have been conferred. The important rank, among human evils and
wrongs, of the disappointment of expectation, is shown in the fact that
it constitutes the principal criminality of two such highly immoral acts
as a breach of friendship and a breach of promise. Few hurts which human
beings can sustain are greater, and none wound more, than when that on
which they habitually and with full assurance relied, fails them in the
hour of need; and few wrongs are greater than this mere withholding of
good; none excite more resentment, either in the person suffering, or in
a sympathizing spectator. The principle, therefore, of giving to each
what they deserve, that is, good for good as well as evil for evil, is
not only included within the idea of Justice as we have defined it, but
is a proper object of that intensity of sentiment, which places the
Just, in human estimation, above the simply Expedient.
Most of the maxims of justice current in the world, and commonly
appealed to in its transactions, are simply instrumental to carrying
into effect the principles of justice which we have now spoken of. That
a person is only responsible for what he has done voluntarily, or could
voluntarily have avoided; that it is unjust to condemn any person
unheard; that the punishment ought to be proportioned to the offence,
and the like, are maxims intended to prevent the just principle of evil
for evil from being perverted to the infliction of evil without that
justification. The greater part of these common maxims have come into
use from the practice of courts of justice, which have been naturally
led to a more complete recognition and elaboration than was likely to
suggest itself to others, of the rules necessary to enable them to
fulfil their double function, of inflicting punishment when due, and of
awarding to each person his right.
That first of judicial virtues, impartiality, is an obligation of
justice, partly for the reason last mentioned; as being a necessary
condition of the fulfilment of the other obligations of justice. But
this is not the only source of the exalted rank, among human
obligations, of those maxims of equality and impartiality, which, both
in popular estimation and in that of the most enlightened, are included
among the precepts of justice. In one point of view, they may be
considered as corollaries from the principles already laid down. If it
is a duty to do to each according to his deserts, returning good for
good as well as repressing evil by evil, it necessarily follows that we
should treat all equally well (when no higher duty forbids) who have
deserved equally well of us, and that society should treat all equally
well who have deserved equally well of it, that is, who have deserved
equally well absolutely. This is the highest abstract standard of social
and distributive justice; towards which all institutions, and the
efforts of all virtuous citizens, should be made in the utmost possible
degree to converge. But this great moral duty rests upon a still deeper
foundation, being a direct emanation from the first principle of morals,
and not a mere logical corollary from secondary or derivative doctrines.
It is involved in the very meaning of Utility, or the
Greatest-Happiness Principle. That principle is a mere form of words
without rational signification, unless one person's happiness, supposed
equal in degree (with the proper allowance made for kind), is counted
for exactly as much as another's. Those conditions being supplied,
Bentham's dictum, 'everybody to count for one, nobody for more than
one,' might be written under the principle of utility as an explanatory
commentary.[D] The equal claim of everybody to happiness in the
estimation of the moralist and the legislator, involves an equal claim
to all the means of happiness, except in so far as the inevitable
conditions of human life, and the general interest, in which that of
every individual is included, set limits to the maxim; and those limits
ought to be strictly construed. As every other maxim of justice, so
this, is by no means applied or held applicable universally; on the
contrary, as I have already remarked, it bends to every person's ideas
of social expediency. But in whatever case it is deemed applicable at
all, it is held to be the dictate of justice. All persons are deemed to
have a _right_ to equality of treatment, except when some recognised
social expediency requires the reverse. And hence all social
inequalities which have ceased to be considered expedient, assume the
character not of simple inexpediency, but of injustice, and appear so
tyrannical, that people are apt to wonder how they ever could have been
tolerated; forgetful that they themselves perhaps tolerate other
inequalities under an equally mistaken notion of expediency, the
correction of which would make that which they approve seem quite as
monstrous as what they have at last learnt to condemn. The entire
history of social improvement has been a series of transitions, by which
one custom or institution after another, from being a supposed primary
necessity of social existence, has passed into the rank of an
universally stigmatized injustice and tyranny. So it has been with the
distinctions of slaves and freemen, nobles and serfs, patricians and
plebeians; and so it will be, and in part already is, with the
aristocracies of colour, race, and sex.
It appears from what has been said, that justice is a name for certain
moral requirements, which, regarded collectively, stand higher in the
scale of social utility, and are therefore of more paramount obligation,
than any others; though particular cases may occur in which some other
social duty is so important, as to overrule any one of the general
maxims of justice. Thus, to save a life, it may not only be allowable,
but a duty, to steal, or take by force, the necessary food or medicine,
or to kidnap, and compel to officiate, the only qualified medical
practitioner. In such cases, as we do not call anything justice which is
not a virtue, we usually say, not that justice must give way to some
other moral principle, but that what is just in ordinary cases is, by
reason of that other principle, not just in the particular case. By this
useful accommodation of language, the character of indefeasibility
attributed to justice is kept up, and we are saved from the necessity of
maintaining that there can be laudable injustice.
The considerations which have now been adduced resolve, I conceive, the
only real difficulty in the utilitarian theory of morals. It has always
been evident that all cases of justice are also cases of expediency: the
difference is in the peculiar sentiment which attaches to the former, as
contradistinguished from the latter. If this characteristic sentiment
has been sufficiently accounted for; if there is no necessity to assume
for it any peculiarity of origin; if it is simply the natural feeling of
resentment, moralized by being made coextensive with the demands of
social good; and if this feeling not only does but ought to exist in all
the classes of cases to which the idea of justice corresponds; that idea
no longer presents itself as a stumbling-block to the utilitarian
ethics. Justice remains the appropriate name for certain social
utilities which are vastly more important, and therefore more absolute
and imperative, than any others are as a class (though not more so than
others may be in particular cases); and which, therefore, ought to be,
as well as naturally are, guarded by a sentiment not only different in
degree, but also in kind; distinguished from the milder feeling which
attaches to the mere idea of promoting human pleasure or convenience, at
once by the more definite nature of its commands, and by the sterner
character of its sanctions.

## SECOND BOOK: PRACTICAL ETHICS
T
HIS book is about practical ethics, that is, the application
of ethics or morality - 1 shall use the words interchangeably
- to practical issues like the treatment of ethnic minorities,
equality for women, the use of animals for food and research,
the preservation of the natural environment, abortion, euthanasia, and the obligation of the wealthy to help the poor. No
doubt the reader will want to get on to these issues without
delay; but there are some preliminaries that must be dealt with
at the start. In order to have a useful discussion within ethics,
it is necessary to say a little about ethics, so that we have a clear
understanding of what we are doing when we discuss ethical
questions. This first chapter therefore sets the stage for the remainder of the book. In order to prevent it from growing into
an entire volume itself, I have kept it brief. If at times it is
dogmatic, that is because I cannot take the space properly to
consider all the different conceptions of ethics that might be
opposed to the one I shall defend; but this chapter will at least
serve to reveal the assumptions on which the remainder of the
book is based.
WHAT ETHICS IS NOT
Some people think that morality is now out of date. They regard
morality as a system of nasty puritanical prohibitions, mainly
designed to stop people having fun. Traditional moralists claim
to be the defenders of morality in general, but they are really
defending a particular moral code. They have been allowed to
1 

preempt the field to such an extent that when a newspaper
headline reads BISHOP ATTACKS DECLINING MORAL STANDARDS, we expect to read yet again about promiscuity, homosexuality, pornography, and so on, and not about the puny
amounts we give as overseas aid to poorer nations, or our reckless indifference to the natural environment of our planet.
So the first thing to say about ethics is that it is not a set of
prohibitions particularly concerned with sex. Even in the era of
AIDS, sex raises no unique moral issues at all. Decisions about
sex may involve considerations of honesty, concern for others,
prudence, and so on, but there is nothing special about sex in
this respect, for the same could be said of decisions about driving
a car. (In fact, the moral issues raised by driving a car, both
from an environmental and from a safety point of view, are
much more serious than those raised by sex.) Accordingly, this
book contains no discussion of sexual morality. There are more
important ethical issues to be considered.
Second, ethics is not an ideal system that is noble in theory
but no good in practice. The reverse of this is closer to the truth:
an ethical judgment that is no good in practice must suffer from
a theoretical defect as well, for the whole point of ethical judgments is to guide practice.
Some people think that ethics is inapplicable to the real world
because they regard it as a system of short and simple rules like
'Do not lie', 'Do not steal', and 'Do not kill'. It is not surprising
that those who hold this view of ethics should also believe that
ethics is not suited to life's complexities. In unusual situations,
simple rules conflict; and even when they do not, following a
rule can lead to disaster. It may normally be wrong to lie, but
if you were living in Nazi Germany and the Gestapo came to
your door looking for Jews, it would surely be right to deny
the existence of the Jewish family hiding in your attic.
Like the failure of a restrictive sexual morality, the failure of
an ethic of simple rules must not be taken as a failure of ethics
as a whole. It is only a failure of one view of ethics, and not
2 

even an irremediable failure of that view. The deontologists -
those who think that ethics is a system of rules - can rescue
their position by finding more complicated and more specific
rules that do not conflict with each other, or by ranking the
rules in some hierarchical structure to resolve conflicts between
them. Moreover, there is a long-standing approach to ethics
that is quite untouched by the complexities that make simple
rules difficult to apply. This is the consequentialist view. Consequentialists start not with moral rules but with goals. They
assess actions by the extent to which they further these goals.
The best-known, though not the only, consequentialist theory
is utilitarianism. The classical utilitarian regards an action as
right if it produces as much or more of an increase in the happiness of all affected by it than any alternative action, and wrong
if it does not.
The consequences of an action vary according to the circumstances in which it is performed. Hence a utilitarian can never
properly be accused of a lack of realism, or of a rigid adherence
to ideals in defiance of practical experience. The utilitarian will
judge lying bad in some circumstances and good in others, depending on its consequences.
Third, ethics is not something intelligible only in the context
of religion. I shall treat ethics as entirely independent of religion.
Some theists say that ethics cannot do without religion because the very meaning of 'good' is nothing other than 'what
God approves'. Plato refuted a similar claim more than two
thousand years ago by arguing that if the gods approve of some
actions it must be because those actions are good, in which case
it cannot be the gods' approval that makes them good. The
alternative view makes divine approval entirely arbitrary : if the
gods had happened to approve of torture and disapprove of
helping our neighbours, torture would have been good and
helping our neighbours bad. Some modern theists have attempted to extricate themselves from this type of dilemma by
maintaining that God is good and so could not possibly approve
3 

of torture; but these theists are caught in a trap of their own
making, for what can they possibly mean by the assertion that
God is good? That God is approved of by God?
Traditionally, the more important link between religion and
ethics was that religion was thought to provide a reason for
doing what is right, the reason being that those who are virtuous
will be rewarded by an eternity of bliss while the rest roast in
hell. Not all religious thinkers have accepted this argument:
Immanuel Kant, a most pious Christian, scorned anything that
smacked of a self-interested motive for obeying the moral law.
We must obey it, he said, for its own sake. Nor do we have to
be Kantians to dispense with the motivation offered by traditional religion. There is a long line of thought that finds the
source of ethics in the attitudes of benevolence and sympathy
for others that most people have. This is, however, a complex
topic, and since it is the subject of the final chapter of this book
I shall not pursue it here. It is enough to say that our everyday
observation of our fellow human beings clearly shows that ethical behaviour does not require belief in heaven and hell.
The fourth, and last, claim about ethics that I shall deny in
this opening chapter is that ethics is relative or subjective. At
least, I shall deny these claims in some of the senses in which
they are often made. This point requires a more extended discussion than the other three.
Let us take first the oft-asserted idea that ethics is relative to
the society one happens to live in. This is true in one sense and
false in another. It is true that, as we have already seen in
discussing consequentialism, actions that are right in one situation because of their good consequences may be wrong in
another situation because of their bad consequences. Thus casual sexual intercourse may be wrong when it leads to the existence of children who cannot be adequately cared for, and not
wrong when, because of the existence of effective contraception,
it does not lead to reproduction at all. But this is only a superficial form of relativism. While it suggests that the applicability
4 

of a specific principle like 'Casual sex is wrong' may be relative
to time and place, it says nothing against such a principle being
objectively valid in specific circumstances, or against the universal applicability of a more general principle like 'Do what
increases happiness and reduces suffering.'
The more fundamental form of relativism became popular in
the nineteenth century when data on the moral beliefs and
practices of far-flung societies began pouring in. To the strict
reign of Victorian prudery the knowledge that there were places
where sexual relations between unmarried people were regarded as perfectly wholesome brought the seeds of a revolution
in sexual attitudes. It is not surprising that to some the new
knowledge suggested, not merely that the moral code of nineteenth-century Europe was not objectively valid, but that no
moral judgment can do more than reflect the customs of the
society in which it is made.
Marxists adapted this form of relativism to their own theories.
The ruling ideas of each period, they said, are the ideas of its
ruling class, and so the morality of a society is relative to its
dominant economic class, and thus indirectly relative to its economic basis. So they triumphantly refuted the claims of feudal
and bourgeois morality to objective, universal validity. But this
raises a problem: if all morality is relative, what is so special
about communism? Why side with the proletariat rather than
the bourgeoisie?
Engels dealt with this problem in the only way possible, by
abandoning relativism in favour of the more limited claim that
the morality of a society divided into classes will always be
relative to the ruling class, although the morality of a society
without class antagonisms could be a 'really human' morality.
This is no longer relativism at all. Nevertheless, Marxism, in a
confused sort of way, still provides the impetus for a lot of woolly
relativist ideas.
The problem that led Engels to abandon relativism defeats
ordinary ethical relativism as well. Anyone who has thought 

through a difficult ethical decision knows that being told what
our society thinks we ought to do does not settle the quandary.
We have to reach our own decision. The beliefs and customs
we were brought up with may exercise great influence on us,
but once we start to reflect upon them we can decide whether
to act in accordance with them, or to go against them.
The opposite view - that ethics is always relative to a particular society - has most implausible consequences. If our society
disapproves of slavery, while another society approves of it, we
have no basis to choose between these conflicting views. Indeed,
on a relativist analysis there is really no conflict - when I say
slavery is wrong I am really only saying that my society disapproves of slavery, and when the slaveowners from the other
society say that slavery is right, they are only saying that their
society approves of it. Why argue? Obviously we could both be
speaking the truth.
Worse still, the relativist cannot satisfactorily account for the
nonconformist. If 'slavery is wrong' means 'my society disapproves of slavery', then someone who lives in a society that
does not disapprove of slavery is, in claiming that slavery is
wrong, making a simple factual error. An opinion poll could
demonstrate the error of an ethical judgment. Would-be reformers are therefore in a parlous situation: when they set out
to change the ethical views of their fellow-citizens they are
necessarily mistaken; it is only when they succeed in winning
most of the society over to their own views that those views
become right.
These difficulties are enough to sink ethical relativism; ethical
subjectivism at least avoids making nonsense of the valiant efforts of would-be moral reformers, for it makes ethical judgments depend on the approval or disapproval of the person
making the judgment, rather than that person's society. There
are other difficulties, though, that at least some forms of ethical
subjectivism cannot overcome.
If those who say that ethics is subjective mean by this that
6 

when I say that cruelty to animals is wrong I am really only
saying that I disapprove of cruelty to animals, they are faced
with an aggravated form of one of the difficulties of relativism:
the inability to account for ethical disagreement. What was true
for the relativist of disagreement between people from different
societies is for the subjectivist true of disagreement between any
two people. I say cruelty to animals is wrong: someone else
says it is not wrong. If this means that I disapprove of cruelty
to animals and someone else does not, both statements may be
true and so there is nothing to argue about.
Other theories often described as 'subjectivist' are not open
to this objection. Suppose someone maintains that ethical judgments are neither true nor false because they do not describe
anything - neither objective moral facts, nor one's own subjective states of mind. This theory might hold that, as C. L.
Stevenson suggested, ethical judgments express attitudes, rather
than describe them, and we disagree about ethics because we
try, by expressing our own attitude, to bring our listeners to a
similar attitude. Or it might be, as R. M. Hare has urged, that
ethical judgments are prescriptions and therefore more closely
related to commands than to statements of fact. On this view
we disagree because we care about what people do. Those features of ethical argument that imply the existence of objective
moral standards can be explained away by maintaining that this
is some kind of error - perhaps the legacy of the belief that
ethics is a God-given system of law, or perhaps just another
example of our tendency to objectify our personal wants and
preferences. J. L. Mackie has defended this view.
Provided they are carefully distinguished from the crude form
of subjectivism that sees ethical judgments as descriptions of the
speaker's attitudes, these are plausible accounts of ethics. In
their denial of a realm of ethical facts that is part of the real
world, existing quite independently of us, they are no doubt
correct; but does it follow from this that ethical judgments are
immune from criticism, that there is no role for reason or ar7 

gument in ethics, and that, from the standpoint of reason, any
ethical judgment is as good as any other? I do not think it does,
and none of the three philosophers referred to in the previous
paragraph denies reason and argument a role in ethics, though
they disagree as to the significance of this role.
This issue of the role that reason can play in ethics is the
crucial point raised by the claim that ethics is subjective. The
non-existence of a mysterious realm of objective ethical facts
does not imply the non-existence of ethical reasoning. It may
even help, since if we could arrive at ethical judgments only by
intuiting these strange ethical facts, ethical argument would be
more difficult still. So what has to be shown to put practical
ethics on a sound basis is that ethical reasoning is possible. Here
the temptation is to say simply that the proof of the pudding
lies in the eating, and the proof that reasoning is possible in
ethics is to be found in the remaining chapters of this book; but
this is not entirely satisfactory. From a theoretical point of view
it is unsatisfactory because we might find ourselves reasoning
about ethics without really understanding how this can happen;
and from a practical point of view it is unsatisfactory because
our reasoning is more likely to go astray if we lack a grasp of
its foundations. I shall therefore attempt to say something about
how we can reason in ethics.
WHAT ETHICS IS: ONE VIEW
What follows is a sketch of a view of ethics that allows reason
an important role in ethical decisions. It is not the only possible
view of ethics, but it is a plausible view. Once again, however,
I shall have to pass over qualifications and objections worth a
chapter to themselves. To those who think these undiscussed
objections defeat the position I am advancing, I can only say,
again, that this whole chapter may be treated as no more than
a statement of the assumptions on which this book is based. In
8 

that way it will at least assist in giving a clear view of what I
take ethics to be.
What is it to make a moral judgment, or to argue about an
ethical issue, or to live according to ethical standards? How do
moral judgments differ from other practical judgments? Why
do we regard a woman's decision to have an abortion as raising
an ethical issue, but not her decision to change her job? What
is the difference between a person who lives by ethical standards
and one who doesn't?
All these questions are related, so we only need to consider
one of them; but to do this we need to say something about
the nature of ethics. Suppose that we have studied the lives of
a number of different people, and we know a lot about what
they do, what they believe, and so on. Can we then decide
which of them are living by ethical standards and which are
not?
We might think that the way to proceed here is to find out
who beljeves it wrong to lie, cheat, steal, and so on and does
not do any of these things, and who has no such beliefs, and
shows no such restraint in their actions. Then those in the first
group would be living according to ethical standards and those
in the second group would not be. But this procedure mistakenly
assimilates two distinctions: the first is the distinction between
living according to (what we judge to be) the right ethical standards and living according to (what we judge to be) mistaken
ethical standards; the second is the distinction between living
according to some ethical standards, and living according to no
ethical standards at all. Those who lie and cheat, but do not
believe what they are doing to be wrong, may be living according to ethical standards. They may believe, for any of a
number of possible reasons, that it is right to lie, cheat, steal,
and so on. They are not living according to conventional ethical
standards, but they may be living according to some other ethical standards.
This first attempt to distinguish the ethical from the non9 

ethical was mistaken, but we can learn from our mistakes. We
found that we must concede that those who hold unconventional ethical beliefs are still living according to ethical standards,
if they believe, for any reason, that it is right to do as they are doing.
The italicised condition gives us a clue to the answer we are
seeking. The notion of living according to ethical standards is
tied up with the notion of defending the way one is living, of
giving a reason for it, of justifying it. Thus people may do all
kinds of things we regard as wrong, yet still be living according
to ethical standards, if they are prepared to defend and justify
what they do. We may find the justification inadequate, and
may hold that the actions are wrong, but the attempt at justification, whether successful or not, is sufficient to bring the
person's conduct within the domain of the ethical as opposed
to the non-ethical. When, on the other hand, people cannot
put forward any justification for what they do, we may reject
their claim to be living according to ethical standards, even if
what they do is in accordance with conventional moral principles.
We can go further. If we are to accept that a person is living
according to ethical standards, the justification must be of a
certain kind. For instance, a justification in terms of self -interest
alone will not do. When Macbeth, contemplating the murder
of Duncan, admits that only 'vaulting ambition' drives him to
do it, he is admitting that the act cannot be justified ethically.
'So that I can be king in his place' is not a weak attempt at an
ethical justification for assassination; it is not the sort of reason
that counts as an ethical justification at all. Self-interested acts
must be shown to be compatible with more broadly based ethical principles if they are to be ethically defensible, for the notion
of ethics carries with it the idea of something bigger than the
individual. If I am to defend my conduct on ethical grounds, I
cannot point only to the benefits it brings me. I must address
myself to a larger audience.
From ancient times, philosophers and moralists have ex10 

pressed the idea that ethical conduct is acceptable from a point
of view that is somehow universal. The 'Golden Rule' attributed
to Moses, to be found in the book of Leviticus and subsequently
repeated by Jesus, tells us to go beyond our own personal interests and 'love thy neighbour as thyself - in other words, give
the same weight to the interests of others as one gives to one's
own interests. The same idea of putting oneself in the position
of another is involved in the other Christian formulation of the
commandment, that we do to others as we would have them
do to us. The Stoics held that ethics derives from a universal
natural law. Kant developed this idea into his famous formula:
'Act only on that maxim through which you can at the same
time will that it should become a universal law.' Kant's theory
has itself been modified and developed by R. M. Hare, who sees
universalisability as a logical feature of moral judgments. The
eighteenth -century British philosophers Hutcheson, Hume, and
Adam Smith appealed to an imaginary 'impartial spectator' as
the test of a moral judgment, and this theory has its modern
version in the Ideal Observer theory. Utilitarians, from Jeremy
Bentham to J. J. C. Smart, take it as axiomatic that in deciding
moral issues 'each counts for one and none for more than one';
while John Rawls, a leading contemporary critic of utilitarianism, incorporates essentially the same axiom into his own theory
by deriving basic ethical principles from an imaginary choice in
which those choosing do not know whether they will be the
ones who gain or lose by the principles they select. Even Continental European philosophers like the existentialist Jean -Paul
Sartre and the critical theorist Jurgen Habermas, who differ in
many ways from their English-speaking colleagues - and from
each other - agree that ethics is in some sense universal.
One could argue endlessly about the merits of each of these
characterisations of the ethical; but what they have in common
is more important than their differences. They agree that an
ethicalj)rinciple cannot be justified in relation to any partial or
sectional group. Ethics takes a universal point of view. This does
r 1 1 

not mean that a particular ethical judgment must be universally
applicable. Circumstances alter causes, as we have seen. What
it does mean is that in making ethical judgments we go beyond
our own likes and dislikes. From an ethical point of view, the
fact that it is I who benefit from, say, a more equal distribution
of income and you who lose by it, is irrelevant. Ethics requires
us to go beyond T and 'you' to the universal law, the universalisable judgment, the standpoint of the impartial spectator
or ideal observer, or whatever we choose to call it.
Can we use this universal aspect of ethics to derive an ethical
theory that will give us guidance about right and wrong? Philosophers from the Stoics to Hare and Rawls have attempted
this. No attempt has met with general acceptance. The problem
is that if we describe the universal aspect of ethics in bare, formal
terms, a wide range of ethical theories, including quite irreconcilable ones, are compatible with this notion of universality;
if, on the other hand, we build up our description of the universal aspect of ethics so that it leads us ineluctably to one
particular ethical theory, we shall be accused of smuggling our
own ethical beliefs into our definition of the ethical - and this
definition was supposed to be broad enough, and neutral
enough, to encompass all serious candidates for the status of
'ethical theory'. Since so many others have failed to overcome
this obstacle to deducing an ethical theory from the universal
aspect of ethics, it would be foolhardy to attempt to do so in a
brief introduction to a work with a quite different aim. Nevertheless I shall propose something only a little less ambitious.
The universal aspect of ethics, I suggest, does provide a persuasive, although not conclusive, reason for taking a broadly
utilitarian position.
My reason for suggesting this is as follows. In accepting that
ethical judgments must be made from a universal point of view,
I am accepting that my own interests cannot, simply because
they are my interests, count more than the interests of anyone
else. Thus my very natural concern that my own interests be
12 

fcoked after must, when I think ethically, be extended to the
interests of others. Now, imagine that I am trying to decide
between two possible courses of action - perhaps whether to
eat all the fruits I have collected myself, or to share them with
others. Imagine, too, that I am deciding in a complete ethical
vacuum, that I know nothing of any ethical considerations - I
am, we might say, in a pre-ethical stage of thinking. How would
I make up my mind? One thing that would be still relevant
would be how the possible courses of action will affect my
interests. Indeed, if we define 'interests' broadly enough, so that
we count anything people desire as in their interests (unless it
is incompatible with another desire or desires), then it would
seem that at this pre-ethical stage, only one's own interests can
be relevant to the decision.
Suppose I then begin to think ethically, to the extent of recognising that my own interests cannot count for more, simply
because they are my own, than the interests of others. In place
of my own interests, I now have to take into account the interests of all those affected by my decision. This requires me to
weigh up all these interests and adopt the course of action most
likely to maximise the interests of those affected. Thus at least
at some level in my moral reasoning I must choose the course
of action that has the best consequences, on balance, for all
affected. (I say 'at some level in my moral reasoning' because,
as we shall see later, there are utilitarian reasons for believing
that we ought not to try to calculate these consequences for
every ethical decision we make in our daily lives, but only in
very unusual circumstances, or perhaps when we are reflecting
on our choice of general principles to guide us in future. In
other words, in the specific example given, at first glance one
might think it obvious that sharing the fruit that I have gathered
has better consequences for all affected than not sharing them.
This may in thp end also be the best general principle for us all
to adopt, but before we can have grounds for believing this to
be the case, we must also consider whether the effect of a general
r 13 

practice of sharing gathered fruits will benefit all those affected,
by bringing about a more equal distribution, or whether it will
reduce the amount of food gathered, because some will cease
to gather anything if they know that they will get sufficient from
their share of what others gather.)
The way of thinking I have outlined is a form of utilitarianism.
It differs from classical utilitarianism in that 'best consequences'
is understood as meaning what, on balance, furthers the interests of those affected, rather than merely what increases pleasure
and reduces pain. (It has, however, been suggested that classical
utilitarians like Bentham and John Stuart Mill used 'pleasure'
and 'pain' in a broad sense that allowed them to include achieving what one desired as a 'pleasure' and the reverse as a 'pain'.
If this interpretation is correct, the difference between classical
utilitarianism and utilitarianism based on interests disappears.)
What does this show? It does not show that utilitarianism
can be deduced from the universal aspect of ethics. There are
other ethical ideals - like individual rights, the sanctity of life,
justice, purity, and so on - that are universal in the required
sense, and are, at least in some versions, incompatible with
utilitarianism. It does show that we very swiftly arrive at an
initially utilitarian position once we apply the universal aspect
of ethics to simple, pre-ethical decision making. This, I believe,
places the onus of proof on those who seek to go beyond utilitarianism. The utilitarian position is a minimal one, a first base
that we reach by universalising self-interested decision making.
We cannot, if we are to think ethically, refuse to take this step.
If we are to be persuaded that we should go beyond utilitarianism and accept non-utilitarian moral rules or ideals, we need
to be provided with good reasons for taking this further step.
Until such reasons are produced, we have some grounds for
remaining utilitarians.
This tentative argument for utilitarianism corresponds to the
way in which I shall discuss practical issues in this book. I am
inclined to hold a utilitarian position, and to some extent the
14 

book may be taken as an attempt to indicate how a consistent
utilitarianism would deal with a number of controversial problems. But I shall not take utilitarianism as the only ethical position worth considering. I shall try to show the bearing of other
views, of theories of rights, of justice, of the sanctity of life, and
so on, on the problems discussed. In this way readers will be
able to come to their own conclusions about the relative merits
of utilitarian and non-utilitarian approaches, and about the
whole issue of the role of reason and argument in ethics.
)
r 15 
16
EQUALITY AND ITS
IMPLICATIONS
THE BASIS OF EQUALITY
T
HE present century has seen dramatic changes in moral
attitudes. Most of these changes are still controversial. Abortion, almost everywhere prohibited thirty years ago, is now legal
in many countries (though it is still opposed by substantial and
respected sections of the population). The same is true of
changes in attitudes to sex outside marriage, homosexuality,
pornography, euthanasia, and suicide. Great as the changes
have been, no new consensus has been reached. The issues
remain controversial and it is possible to defend either side
without jeopardising one's intellectual or social standing.
Equality seems to be different. The change in attitudes to
inequality - especially racial inequality - has been no less sudden and dramatic than the change in attitudes to sex, but it has
been more complete. Racist assumptions shared by most Europeans at the turn of the century are now totally unacceptable,
at least in public life. A poet could not now write of 'lesser
breeds without the law', and retain - indeed enhance - his
reputation, as Rudyard Kipling did in 1897. This does not mean
that there are no longer any racists, but only that they must
disguise their racism if their views and policies are to have any
chance of general acceptance. Even South Africa has abandoned
apartheid. The principle that all humans are equal is now part
of the prevailing political and ethical orthodoxy. But what, exactly, does it mean and why do we accept it?
Once we go beyond the agreement that blatant forms of racial
16 

discrimination are wrong, once we question the basis of the
principle that all humans are equal and seek to apply this principle to particular cases, the consensus starts to weaken. One
sign of this was the furor that occurred during the 1970s over
the claims made by Arthur Jensen, professor of educational
psychology at the University of California, Berkeley, and H. J.
Eysenck, professor of psychology at the University of London,
about genetically based variations in intelligence between different races. Many of the most forceful opponents of Jensen
and Eysenck assume that these claims, if sound, would justify
racial discrimination. Are they right? Similar questions can
be asked about research into differences between males and
females.
Another issue requiring us to think about the principle of
equality is 'affirmative action'. Some philosophers and lawyers
have argued that the principle of equality requires that when
allocating jobs or university places we should favour members
of disadvantaged minorities. Others have contended that the
same principle of equality rules out any discrimination on racial
grounds, whether for or against the worst-off members of society.
We can only answer these questions if we are clear about
what it is we intend to say, and can justifiably say, when we
assert that all humans are equal - hence the need for an inquiry
into the ethical foundations of the principle of equality.
When we say that all humans are equal, irrespective of race
or sex, what exactly are we claiming? Racists, sexists, and other
opponents of equality have often pointed out that, by whatever
test we choose, it simply is not true that all humans are equal.
Some are tall, some are short; some are good at mathematics,
others are poor at it; some can run 100 metres in ten seconds,
some take fifteen* or twenty; some would never intentionally
hurt another being, others would kill a stranger for $100 if they
could get away with it; some have emotional lives that touch
the heights of ecstasy and the depths of despair, while others
r 17 

live on a more even plane, relatively untouched by what goes
on around them. And so we could go on. The plain fact is that
humans differ, and the differences apply to so many characteristics that the search for a factual basis on which to erect the
principle of equality seems hopeless.
John Rawls has suggested, in his influential book A Theory of
Justice, that equality can be founded on the natural characteristics of human beings, provided we select what he calls a 'range
property'. Suppose we draw a circle on a piece of paper. Then
all points within the circle - this is the 'range' - have the property of being within the circle, and they have this property
equally, Some points may be closer to the centre and others
nearer the edge, but all are, equally, points inside the circle.
Similarly, Rawls suggests, the property of 'moral personality' is
a property that virtually all humans possess, and all humans
who possess this property possess it equally. By 'moral personality' Rawls does not mean 'morally good personality'; he is
using 'moral' in contrast to 'amoral'. A moral person, Rawls
says, must have a sense of justice. More broadly, one might say
that to be a moral person is to be the kind of person to whom
one can make moral appeals, with some prospect that the appeal
will be heeded.
Rawls maintains that moral personality is the basis of human
equality, a view that derives from his 'contract' approach to
justice. The contract tradition sees ethics as a kind of mutually
beneficial agreement - roughly, 'Don't hit me and I won't hit
you.' Hence only those capable of appreciating that they are not
being hit, and of restraining their own hitting accordingly, are
within the sphere of ethics.
There are problems with using moral personality as the basis
of equality. One objection is that having a moral personality is
a matter of degree. Some people are highly sensitive to issues
of justice and ethics generally; others, for a variety of reasons,
have only a limited awareness of such principles. The suggestion
that being a moral person is the minimum necessary for coming
18 

within the scope of the principle of equality still leaves it open
just where this minimal line is to be drawn. Nor is it intuitively
obvious why, if moral personality is so important, we should
not have grades of moral status, with rights and duties corresponding to the degree of refinement of one's sense of justice.
Still more serious is the objection that it is not true that all
humans are moral persons, even in the most minimal sense.
Infants and small children, along with some intellectually disabled humans, lack the required sense of justice. Shall we then
say that all humans are equal, except for very young or intellectually disabled ones? This is certainly not what we ordinarily
understand by the principle of equality. If this revised principle
implies that we may disregard the interests of very young or
intellectually disabled humans in ways that would be wrong if
they were older or more intelligent, we would need far stronger
arguments to induce us to accept it. (Rawls deals with infants
and children by including potential moral persons along with
actual ones within the scope of the principle of equality. But
this is an ad hoc device, confessedly designed to square his
theory with our ordinary moral intuitions, rather than something for which independent arguments can be produced. Moreover although Rawls admits that those with irreparable
intellectual disabilities 'may present a difficulty' he offers no
suggestions towards the solution of this difficulty.)
So the possession of 'moral personality' does not provide a
satisfactory basis for the principle that all humans are equal. I
doubt that any natural characteristic, whether a 'range property'
or not, can fulfil this function, for I doubt that there is any
morally significant property that all humans possess equally.
There is another possible line of defence for the belief that
there is a factual basis for a principle of equality that prohibits
racism and sexism. We can admit that humans differ as individuals, and yet insist that there are no morally significant differences between the races and sexes. Knowing that someone
is of African or European descent, female or male, does not >
19 

enable us to draw conclusions about her or his intelligence,
sense of justice, depth of feelings, or anything else that would
entitle us to treat her or him as less than equal. The racist claim
that people of European descent are superior to those of other
races in these capacities is in this sense false. The differences
between individuals in these respects are not captured by racial
boundaries. The same is true of the sexist stereotype that sees
women as emotionally deeper and more caring, but also less
rational, less aggressive, and less enterprising than men. Obviously this is not true of women as a whole. Some women are
emotionally shallower, less caring, and more rational, more
aggressive and, more enterprising than some men.
The fact that humans differ as individuals, not as races or
sexes, is important, and we shall return to it when we come to
discuss the implications of the claims made by Jensen, Eysenck,
and others; yet it provides neither a satisfactory principle of
equality nor an adequate defence against a more sophisticated
opponent of equality than the blatant racist or sexist. Suppose
that someone proposes that people should be given intelligence
tests and then classified into higher or lower status categories
on the basis of the results. Perhaps those who scored above 125
would be a slave-owning class; those scoring between 100 and
125 would be free citizens but lack the right to own slaves;
while those scoring below 100 would be made the slaves of
those who had scored above 125. A hierarchical society of this
sort seems as abhorrent as one based on race or sex; but if we
base our support for equality on the factual claim that differences
between individuals cut across racial and sexual boundaries, we
have no grounds for opposing this kind of inegalitarianism. For
this hierarchical society would be based on real differences between people.
We can reject this 'hierarchy of intelligence' and similar fantastic schemes only if we are clear that the claim to equality
does not rest on the possession of intelligence, moral personality,
rationality, or similar matters of fact. There is no logically com20 

pelling reason for assuming that a difference in ability between
two people justifies any difference in the amount of consideration we give to their interests. Equality is a basic ethical principle, not an assertion of fact. We can see this if we return to
our earlier discussion of the universal aspect of ethical judgments.
We saw in the previous chapter that when I make an ethical
judgment I must go beyond a personal or sectional point of view
and take into account the interests of all those affected. This
means that we weigh up interests, considered simply as interests
and not as my interests, or the interests of Australians, or of
people of European descent. This provides us with a basic principle of equality: the principle of equal consideration of interests.
The essence of the principle of equal consideration of interests
is that we give equal weight in our moral deliberations to the
like interests of all those affected by our actions. This means
that if only X and Y would be affected by a possible act, and if
X stands to lose more than Y stands to gain, it is better not to
do the act. We cannot, if we accept the principle of equal consideration of interests, say that doing the act is better, despite
the facts described, because we are more concerned about Y
than we are about X. What the principle really amounts to is
this: an interest is an interest, whoever's interest it may be.
We can make this more concrete by considering a particular
interest, say the interest we have in the relief of pain. Then the
principle says that the ultimate moral reason for relieving pain
is simply the undesirability of pain as such, and not the undesirability of X's pain, which might be different from the undesirability of Y's pain. Of course, X's pain might be more
undesirable than Y's pain because it is more painful, and then
the principle of equal consideration would give greater weight
to the relief of X's pain. Again, even wBere the pains are equal,
other factors might be relevant, especially if others are affected.
If there has been an earthquake we might give priority to the
relief of a dpctor's pain so she can treat other victims. But the
21 

doctor's pain itself counts only once, and with no added weighting. The principle of equal consideration of interests acts like a
pair of scales, weighing interests impartially. True scales favour
the side where the interest is stronger or where several interests
combine to< 1outweigh a smaller number of similar interests; but
they take no account of whose interests they are weighing.
From this point of view race is irrelevant to the consideration
of interests; for all that counts are the interests themselves. To
give less consideration to a specified amount of pain because
that pain was experienced by a member of a particular race
would be to make an arbitrary distinction. Why pick on race?
Why not on whether a person was born in a leap year? Or
whether there is more than one vowel in her surname? All
these characteristics are equally irrelevant to the undesirability
of pain from the universal point of view. Hence the principle
of equal consideration of interests shows straightforwardly why
the most blatant forms of racism, like that of the Nazis, are
wrong. For the Nazis were concerned only for the welfare of
members of the 'Aryan' race, and the sufferings of Jews, Gypsies,
and Slavs were of no concern to them.
The principle of equal consideration of interests is sometimes
thought to be a purely formal principle, lacking in substance
and too weak to exclude any inegalitarian practice. We have
already seen, however, that it does exclude racism and sexism,
at least in their most blatant forms. If we look at the impact of
the principle on the imaginary hierarchical society based on
intelligence tests we can see that it is strong enough to provide
a basis for rejecting this more sophisticated form of inegalitarianism, too.
The principle of equal consideration of interests prohibits
making our readiness to consider the interests of others depend
on their abilities or other characteristics, apart from the characteristic of having interests. It is true that we cannot know
where equal consideration of interests will lead us until we
know what interests people have, and this may vary according
22 

to their abilities or other characteristics. Consideration of the
interests of mathematically gifted children may lead us to teach
them advanced mathematics at an early age, which for different
children might be entirely pointless or positively harmful. But
the basic element, the taking into account of the person's interests, whatever they may be, must apply to everyone, irrespective of race, sex, or scores on an intelligence test. Enslaving
those who score below a certain line on an intelligence test
would not - barring extraordinary and implausible beliefs about
human nature - be compatible with equal consideration. Intelligence has nothing to do with many important interests that
humans have, like the interest in avoiding pain, in developing
one's abilities, in satisfying basic needs for food and shelter, in
enjoying friendly and loving relations with others, and in being
free to pursue one's projects without unnecessary interference
from others. Slavery prevents the slaves from satisfying these
interests as they would want to; and the benefits it confers on
the slave-owners are hardly comparable in importance to the
harm it does to the slaves.
So the principle of equal consideration of interests is strong
enough to rule out an intelligence-based slave society as well
as cruder forms of racism and sexism. It also rules out discrimination on the grounds of disability, whether intellectual or
physical, in so far as the disability is not relevant to the interests
under consideration (as, for example, severe intellectual disability might be if we are considering a person's interest in voting
in an election). The principle of equal consideration of interests
therefore may be a defensible form of the principle that all
humans are equal, a form that we can use in discussing more
controversial issues about equality. Before we go on to these
topics, however, it will be useful to say a little more about the
nature of the principle.
Equal consideration of interests is a minimal principle of
equality in the sense that it does not dictate equal treatment.
Take a relatively straightforward example of an interest, the
23 

interest in having physical pain relieved. Imagine that after an
earthquake I come across two victims, one with a crushed leg,
in agony, and one with a gashed thigh, in slight pain. I have
only two shots of morphine left. Equal treatment would suggest
that I give one to each injured person, but one shot would not
do much to relieve the pain of the person with the crushed leg.
She would still be in much more pain than the other victim,
and even after I have given her one shot, giving her the second
shot would bring greater relief than giving a shot to the person
in slight pain. Hence equal consideration of interests in this
situation leads to what some may consider an inegalitarian result: two shots of morphine for one person, and none for the
other.
There is a still more controversial inegalitarian implication of
the principle of equal consideration of interests. In the case
above, although equal consideration of interests leads to unequal treatment, this unequal treatment is an attempt to produce
a more egalitarian result. By giving the double dose to the more
seriously injured person, we bring about a situation in which
there is less difference in the degree of suffering felt by the two
victims than there would be if we gave one dose to each. Instead
of ending up with one person in considerable pain and one in
no pain, we end up with two people in slight pain. This is in
line with the principle of declining marginal utility, a principle
well-known to economists, which states that for a given individual, a set amount of something is more useful when people
have little of it than when they have a lot. If I am struggling to
survive on 200 grams of rice a day, and you provide me with
an extra fifty grams per day, you have improved my position
significantly; but if I already have a kilo of rice per day, I won't
care much about the extra fifty grams. When marginal utility
is taken into account the principle of equal consideration of
interests inclines us towards an equal distribution of income,
and to that extent the egalitarian will endorse its conclusions.
What is likely to trouble the egalitarian about the principle of
24 

equal consideration of interests is that there are circumstances
in which the principle of declining marginal utility does not
hold or is overridden by countervailing factors.
We can vary the example of the earthquake victims to illustrate this point. Let us say, again, that there are two victims,
one more severely injured than the other, but this time we shall
say that the more severely injured victim, A, has lost a leg and
is in danger of losing a toe from her remaining leg; while the
less severely injured victim, B, has an injury to her leg, but the
limb can be saved. We have medical supplies for only one person. If we use them on the more severely injured victim the
most we can do is save her toe, whereas if we use them on the
less severely injured victim we can save her leg. In other words,
we assume that the situation is as follows: without medical
treatment, A loses a leg and a toe, while B loses only a leg; if
we give the treatment to A, A loses a leg and B loses a leg; if we
give the treatment to B, A loses a leg and a toe, while B loses
nothing.
Assuming that it is worse to lose a leg than it is to lose a toe
(even when that toe is on one's sole remaining foot) the principle of declining marginal utility does not suffice to give us the
right answer in this situation. We will do more to further the
interests, impartially considered, of those affected by our actions
if we use our limited resources on the less seriously injured
victim than on the more seriously injured one. Therefore this
is what the principle of equal consideration of interests leads us
to do. Thus equal consideration of interests can, in special cases,
widen rather than narrow the gap between two people at different levels of welfare. It is for this reason that the principle is
a minimal principle of equality, rather than a thoroughgoing
egalitarian principle. A more thoroughgoing form of egalitarianism would, however, be difficult to justify, both in general
terms and in its application to special cases of the kind just
described.
Minimal as it is, the principle of equal consideration of in25 

terests can seem too demanding in some cases. Can any of us
really give equal consideration to the welfare of our family and
the welfare of strangers? This question will be dealt with in
Chapter 9, when we consider our obligations to assist those in
need in poorer parts of the world. I shall try to show then that
it does not force us to abandon the principle, although the
principle may force us to abandon some other views we hold.
Meanwhile we shall see how the principle assists us in discussing
some of the controversial issues raised by demands for equality.
EQUALITY AND GENETIC DIVERSITY
In 1969 Arthur Jensen published a long article in the Harvard
Educational Review entitled 'How Much Can We Boost IQ and
Scholastic Achievement?' One short section of the article discussed the probable causes of the undisputed fact that - on
average - African Americans do not score as well as most other
Americans in standard IQ tests. Jensen summarised the upshot
of this section as follows:
All we are left with are various lines of evidence, no one of which
is definitive alone, but which, viewed altogether, make it a not
unreasonable hypothesis that genetic factors are strongly implicated in the average negro-white intelligence difference. The
preponderance of evidence is, in my opinion, less consistent with
a strictly environmental hypothesis than with a genetic hypothesis, which, of course, does not exclude the influence of environment or its interaction with genetic factors.
This heavily qualified statement comes in the midst of a detailed
review of a complex scientific subject, published in a scholarly
journal. It would hardly have been surprising if it passed unnoticed by anyone but scientists working in the area of psychology or genetics. Instead it was widely reported in the
popular press as an attempt to defend racism on scientific
grounds. Jensen was accused of spreading racist propaganda
and likened to Hitler. His lectures were shouted down and stu26 

dents demanded that he be dismissed from his university post.
H. J. Eysenck, a British professor of psychology who supported
Jensen's theories received similar treatment, in Britain and Australia as well as in the United States. Interestingly, Eysenck's
argument did not suggest that those of European descent have
the highest average intelligence among Americans; instead, he
noted some evidence that Americans of Japanese and Chinese
descent do better on tests of abstract reasoning (despite coming
from backgrounds lower on the socioeconomic scale) than
Americans of European descent.
The opposition to genetic explanations of alleged racial differences in intelligence is only one manifestation of a more
general opposition to genetic explanations in other socially sensitive areas. It closely parallels, for instance, initial feminist hostility to the idea that there are biological factors behind male
dominance. (The second wave of the feminist movement seems
to be more willing to entertain the idea that biological differences between the sexes are influential in, for example, greater
male aggression and stronger female caring behaviour.) The
opposition to genetic explanations also has obvious links with
the intensity of feeling aroused by sociobiological approaches
to the study of human behaviour. The worry here is that if
human social behaviour is seen as deriving from that of other
social mammals, we shall come to think of hierarchy, male
dominance, and inequality as part of our evolved nature, and
as unchangeable. More recently, the commencement of the international scientific project that is designed to map the human
genome - that is, to provide a detailed scientific description of
the genetic code typical of human beings - has attracted protests
because of apprehension over what such a map might reveal
about genetic differences between humans, and the use to which
such information might be put.
It would be inappropriate for me to attempt to assess the
scientific merits of biological explanations of human behaviour
in general, or of racial or sexual differences in particular. My
27 

concern is rather with the implications of these theories for the
ideal of equality. For this purpose it is not necessary for us to
establish whether the theories are right. All we have to ask is:
suppose that one ethnic group does turn out to have a higher
average IQ than another, and that part of this difference has a
genetic basis. Would this mean that racism is defensible, and
we have to reject the principle of equality? A similar question
can be asked about the impact of theories of biological differences between the sexes. In neither case does the question assume that the theories are sound. It would be most unfortunate
if our scepticism about such things led us to neglect these questions and then unexpected evidence turned up confirming the
theories, with the result that a confused and unprepared public
took the theories to have implications for the ideal of equality
that they do not have.
I shall begin by considering the implications of the view that
there is a difference in the average IQ of two different ethnic
groups, and that genetic factors are responsible for at least a
part of this difference. I shall then consider the impact of alleged
differences in temperament and ability between the sexes.
Racial Differences and Racial Equality
Let us suppose, just for the sake of exploring the consequences,
that evidence accumulates supporting the hypothesis that there
are differences in intelligence between the different ethnic
groups of human beings. (We should not assume that this would
mean that Europeans come out on top. As we have already
seen, there is some evidence to the contrary.) What significance
would this have for our views about racial equality?
First a word of caution. When people talk of differences in
intelligence between ethnic groups, they are usually referring
to differences in scores on standard IQ tests. Now 'IQ' stands
for 'intelligence quotient' but this does not mean that an IQ test
really measures what we mean by 'intelligence' in ordinary
28 

contexts. Obviously there is some correlation between the two:
if schoolchildren regarded by their teachers as highly intelligent
did not generally score better on IQ tests than schoolchildren
regarded as below normal intelligence, the tests would have to
be changed - as indeed they were changed in the past. But this
does not show how close the correlation is, and since our ordinary concept of intelligence is vague, there is no way of telling.
Some psychologists have attempted to overcome this difficulty
by simply defining 'intelligence' as 'what intelligence tests measure', but this merely introduces a new concept of 'intelligence',
which is easier to measure than our ordinary notion but may
be quite different in meaning. Since 'intelligence' is a word in
everyday use, to use the same word in a different sense is a sure
path to confusion. What we should talk about, then, is differences in IQ, rather than differences in intelligence, since this is
all that the available evidence could support.
The distinction between intelligence and scores on IQ tests
has led some to conclude that IQ is of no importance; this is
the opposite, but equally erroneous, extreme to the view that
IQ is identical with intelligence. IQ is important in our society.
One's IQ is a factor in one's prospects of improving one's occupational status, income, or social class. If there are genetic
factors in racial differences in IQ, there will be genetic factors
in racial differences in occupational status, income, and social
class. So if we are interested in equality, we cannot ignore IQ.
When people of different racial origin are given IQ tests, there
tend to be differences in the average scores they get. The existence of such differences is not seriously disputed, even by those
w ho most vigorously opposed the views put forward by Jensen
and Eysenck. What is hotly disputed is whether the differences i
are primarily to be explained by heredity or by environment -
in other words, whether they reflect innate differences between
different groups of human beings, or whether they are due to
the different social and educational situations in which these
groups find themselves. Almost everyone accepts that environ29 

mental factors do play a role in IQ differences between groups;
the debate is over whether they can explain all or virtually all
of the differences.
Let us suppose that the genetic hypothesis turns out to be
correct (making this supposition, as I have said, not because we
believe it is correct but in order to explore its implications);
what would be the implications of genetically based differences
in IQ between different races? I believe that the implications of
this supposition are less drastic than they are often supposed to
be and give no comfort to genuine racists. I have three reasons
for this view.
First, the genetic hypothesis does not imply that we should
reduce our efforts to overcome other causes of inequality between people, for example, in the quality of housing and schooling available to less well-off people. Admittedly, if the genetic
hypothesis is correct, these efforts will not bring about a situation in which different racial groups have equal IQs. But this
is no reason for accepting a situation in which any people are
hindered by their environment from doing as well as they can.
Perhaps we should put special efforts into helping those who
start from a position of disadvantage, so that we end with a
more egalitarian result.
Second, the fact that the average IQ of one racial group is a
few points higher than that of another does not allow anyone
to say that all members of the higher IQ group have higher IQs
than all members of the lower IQ group - this is clearly false
for any racial group - or that any particular individual in the
higher IQ group has a higher IQ than a particular individual in
the lower IQ group - this will often be false. The point is that
these figures are averages and say nothing about individuals.
There will be a substantial overlap in IQ scores between the two
groups. So whatever the cause of the difference in average IQs,
it will provide no justification for racial segregation in education
or any other field. It remains true that members of different
30 

racial groups must be treated as individuals, irrespective of their
race.
The third reason why the genetic hypothesis gives no support
for racism is the most fundamental of the three. It is simply
that, as we saw earlier, the principle of equality is not based on
any actual equality that all people share. I have argued that the
only defensible basis for the principle of equality is equal consideration of interests, and I have also suggested that the most
important human interests - such as the interest in avoiding
pain, in developing one's abilities, in satisfying basic needs for
food and shelter, in enjoying warm personal relationships, in
being free to pursue one's projects without interference, and
many others - are not affected by differences in intelligence.
We can be even more confident that they are not affected by
differences in IQ. Thomas Jefferson, who drafted the ringing
assertion of equality with which the American Declaration of
Independence begins, knew this. In reply to an author who had
endeavoured to refute the then common view that Africans lack
intelligence, he wrote:
Be assured that no person living wishes more sincerely than I
do, to see a complete refutation of the doubts I have myself
entertained and expressed on the grade of understanding allotted
to them by nature, and to find that they are on a par with
ourselves... but whatever be their degree of talent, it is no measure of their rights. Because Sir Isaac Newton was superior to
others in understanding, he was not therefore lord of the property
or person of others.
Jefferson was right. Equal status does not depend on intelligence. Racists who maintain the contrary are in peril of being
forced to kneel before the next genius they encounter.
These three reasons suffice to show that claims that for genetic
reasons one racial group is not as good as another at IQ tests
do not provide grounds for denying the moral principle that all
humans are equal. The third reason, however, has further ram31 

ifications that we shall follow up after discussing differences
between the sexes.
Sexual Differences and Sexual Equality
The debates over psychological differences between females and
males are not about IQ in general. On general IQ tests there are
no consistent differences in the average scores of females and
males. But IQ tests measure a range of different abilities, and
when we break the results down according to the type of ability
measured, we do find significant differences between the sexes.
There is some evidence suggesting that females have greater
verbal ability than males. This involves being better able to
understand complex pieces of writing and being more creative
with words. Males, on the other hand, appear to have greater
mathematical ability, and also do better on tests involving what
is known as 'visual-spatial' ability. An example of a task requiring visual-spatial ability is one in which the subject is asked
to find a shape, say a square, which is embedded or hidden in
a more complex design.
We shall discuss the significance of these relatively minor
differences in intellectual abilities shortly. The sexes also differ
markedly in one major non-intellectual characteristic: aggression. Studies conducted on children in several different cultures
have borne out what parents have long suspected: boys are
more likely to play roughly, attack each other and fight back
when attacked, than girls. Males are readier to hurt others than
females; a tendency reflected in the fact that almost all violent
criminals are male. It has been suggested that aggression is
associated with competitiveness and the drive to dominate others and get to the top of whatever pyramid one is a part of. In
contrast, females are readier to adopt a role that involves caring
for others.
These are the major psychological differences that have repeatedly been observed in many studies of females and males.
32 

What is the origin of these differences? Once again the rival
explanations are environmental versus biological, nurture versus nature. Although this question of origin is important in some
special contexts, it was given too much weight by the first wave
of feminists who assumed that the case for women's liberation
rested on acceptance of the environmental side of the controversy. What is true of racial discrimination holds here, too:
discrimination can be shown to be wrong whatever the origin
of the known psychological differences. But first let us look
briefly at the rival explanations.
Anyone who has had anything to do with children will know
that in all sorts of ways children learn that the sexes have different roles. Boys get trucks or guns for their birthday presents;
girls get dolls or brush and comb sets. Girls are put into dresses
and told how nice they look; boys are dressed in jeans and
praised for their strength and daring. Children's books almost
invariably used to portray fathers going out to work while mothers clean the house and cook the dinner; some still do, although
in many countries feminist criticisms of this type of literature
have had some impact.
Social conditioning exists, certainly, but does it explain the
differences between the sexes? It is, at best, an incomplete explanation. We still need to know why our society - and not just
ours, but practically every human society - should shape children in this way. One popular answer is that in earlier, simpler
societies, the sexes had different roles because women had to
breast-feed their children during the long period before weaning. This meant that the women stayed closer to home while
the men went out to hunt. As a result females evolved a more
social and emotional character, while males became tougher
and more aggressive. Because physical strength and aggression
were the ultimate forms of power in these simple societies, males
became dominant. The sex roles that exist today are, on this
view, an inheritance from these simpler circumstances, an inheritance that became obsolete once technology made it possible
33 

for the weakest person to operate a crane that lifts fifty tons, or
fire a missile that kills millions. Nor do women have to be tied
to home and children in the way they used to be, since a woman
can now combine motherhood and a career.
The alternative view is that while social conditioning plays
some role in determining psychological differences between the
sexes, biological factors are also at work. The evidence for this
view is particularly strong in respect of aggression. In The Psychology of Sex Differences, Eleanor Emmons Maccoby and Carol
Nagy Jacklin give four grounds for their belief that the greater
aggression of males has a biological component:
1 Males are more aggressive than females in all human societies
in which the difference has been studied.
2 Similar differences are found in humans and in apes and other
closely related animals.
3 The differences are found in very young children, at an age
when there is no evidence of any social conditioning in this
direction (indeed Maccoby and Jacklin found some evidence
that boys are more severely punished for showing aggression
than girls).
4 Aggression has been shown to vary according to the level of
sex hormones, and females become more aggressive if they
receive male hormones.
The evidence for a biological basis of the differences in visualspatial ability is a little more complicated, but it consists largely
of genetic studies that suggest that this ability is influenced by
a recessive sex-linked gene. As a result, it is estimated, approximately 50 per cent of males have a genetic advantage in situations demanding visual-spatial ability, but only 25 per cent
of females have this advantage.
Evidence for and against a biological factor in the superior
verbal ability of females and the superior mathematical ability
of males is, at present, too weak to suggest a conclusion one
way or the other.
Adopting the strategy we used before in discussing race and
IQ, I shall not go further into the evidence for and against these
34 

biological explanations of differences between males and females. Instead I shall ask what the implications of the biological
hypotheses would be.
The differences in the intellectual strengths and weaknesses
of the sexes cannot explain more than a minute proportion of
the difference in positions that males and females hold in our
society. It might explain why, for example, there should be more
males than females in professions like architecture and engineering, professions that may require visual-spatial ability; but
even in these professions, the magnitude of the differences in
numbers cannot be explained by the genetic theory of visualspatial ability. This theory suggests that half as many females
are as genetically advantaged in this area as males, which would
account for the lower average scores of females in tests of visualspatial ability, but cannot account for the fact that in most countries there are not merely twice as many males as females in
architecture and engineering, but at least ten times as many.
Moreover, if superior visual-spatial ability explains the male
dominance of architecture and engineering, why isn't there a
corresponding female advantage in professions requiring high
verbal ability? It is true that there are more women journalists
than engineers, and probably more women have achieved lasting fame as novelists than in any other area of life; yet female
journalists and television commentators continue to be outnumbered by males, outside specifically 'women's subjects' such
as cookery and child care. So even if one accepts biological
explanations for the patterning of these abilities, one can still
argue that women do not have the same opportunities as men
to make the most of the abilities they have.
What of differences in aggression? One's first reaction might
be that feminists should be delighted with the evidence on this
point - what better way could there be of showing the superiority of females than by demonstrating their greater reluctance
to hurt others? But the fact that most violent criminals are male
may be only one side of greater male aggression. The other side
35 

could be greater male competitiveness, ambition, and drive to
achieve power. This would have different, and for feminists less
welcome, implications. Some years ago an American sociologist,
Steven Goldberg, built a provocatively entitled book, The Inevitability of Patriarchy, around the thesis that the biological basis
of greater male aggression will always make it impossible to
bring about a society in which women have as much political
power as men. From this claim it is easy to move to the view
that women should accept their inferior position in society and
not strive to compete with males, or to bring up their daughters
to compete with males in these respects; instead women should
return to their traditional sphere of looking after the home and
children. This is just the kind of argument that has aroused the
hostility of some feminists to biological explanations of male
dominance.
As in the case of race and IQ, the moral conclusions alleged
to follow from the biological theories do not really follow from
them at all. Similar arguments apply.
First, whatever the origin of psychological differences between the sexes, social conditioning can emphasise or soften
these differences. As Maccoby and Jacklin stress, the biological
bias towards, say, male visual-spatial superiority is really a
greater natural readiness to learn these skills. Where women
are brought up to be independent, their visual-spatial ability is
much higher than when they are kept at home and dependent
on males. This is no doubt true of other differences as well.
Hence feminists may well be right to attack the way in which
we encourage girls and boys to develop in distinct directions,
even if this encouragement is not itself responsible for creating
psychological differences between the sexes, but only reinforces
innate predispositions.
Second, whatever the origin of psychological differences between the sexes, they exist only when averages are taken, and
some females are more aggressive and have better visual-spatial
ability than some males. We have seen that the genetic hypo36 

thesis offered in explanation of male visual-spatial superiority
itself suggests that a quarter of all females will have greater
natural visual-spatial ability than half of all males. Our own
observations should convince us that there are females who are
also more aggressive than some males. So, biological explanations or not, we are never in a position to say: 'You're a woman,
so you can't become an engineer', or 'Because you are female,
you will not have the drive and ambition needed to succeed in
politics.' Nor should we assume that no male can possibly have
sufficient gentleness and warmth to stay at home with the children while their mother goes out to work. We must assess
people as individuals, not merely lump them into 'female' and
'male' if we are to find out what they are really like; and we
must keep the roles occupied by females and males flexible if
people are to be able to do what they are best suited for.
The third reason is, like the previous two, parallel to the
reasons I have given for believing that a biological explanation
of racial differences in IQ would not justify racism. The most
important human interests are no more affected by differences
in aggression than they are by differences in intelligence. Less
aggressive people have the same interest in avoiding pain,
developing their abilities, having adequate food and shelter,
enjoying good personal relationships, and so on, as more aggressive people. There is no reason why more aggressive people
ought to be rewarded for their aggression with higher salaries
and the ability to provide better for these interests.
Since aggression, unlike intelligence, is not generally regarded
as a desirable trait, the male chauvinist is hardly likely to deny
that greater aggression in itself provides no ethical justification
of male supremacy. He may, however, offer it as an explanation,
rather than a justification, of the fart that males hold most of
the leading positions in politics, business, the universities and
other areas in which people of both sexes compete for power
and status. He may then go on to suggest that this shows that
the present situation is merely the result of competition between
37 

males and females under conditions of equal opportunity.
Hence, it is not, he may say, unfair. This suggestion raises the
further ramifications of biological differences between people
that, as I said at the close of our discussion of the race and IQ
issue, need to be followed up in more depth.
FROM EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY TO EQUALITY
OF CONSIDERATION
In most Western societies large differences in income and social
status are commonly thought to be all right, as long as they
were brought into being under conditions of equal opportunity.
The idea is that there is no injustice in Jill earning $200,000
and Jack earning $20,000, as long as Jack had his chance to
be where Jill is today. Suppose that the difference in income is
due to the fact that Jill is a doctor whereas Jack is a farm worker.
This would be acceptable if Jack had the same opportunity as
Jill to be a doctor, and this is taken to mean that Jack was not
kept out of medical school because of his race, or religion, or
a disability that was irrelevant to his ability to be a doctor, or
something similar - in effect, if Jack's school results had been
as good as Jill's, he would have been able to study medicine,
become a doctor, and earn $200,000 a year. Life, on this view,
is a kind of race in which it is fitting that the winners should
get the prizes, as long as all get an equal start. The equal start
represents equality of opportunity and this, some say, is as far
as equality should go.
To say that Jack and Jill had equal opportunities to become
a doctor, because Jack would have got into medical school if
his results had been as good as Jill's, is to take a superficial view
of equal opportunity that will not stand up to further probing.
We need to ask why Jack's results were not as good as Jill's.
Perhaps his education up to that point had been inferior - bigger
classes, less qualified teachers, inadequate resources, and so on.
If so, he was not competing on equal terms with Jill after all.
38 

Genuine equality of opportunity requires us to ensure that
schools give the same advantages to everyone.
Making schools equal would be difficult enough, but it is the
easiest of the tasks that await a thoroughgoing proponent of
equal opportunity. Even if schools are the same, some children
will be favoured by the kind of home they come from. A quiet
room to study, plenty of books, and parents who encourage
their child to do well at school could explain why Jill succeeds
where Jack, forced to share a room with two younger brothers
and put up with his father's complaints that he is wasting his
time with books instead of getting out and earning his keep,
does not. But how does one equalise a home? Or parents?
Unless we are prepared to abandon the traditional family setting
and bring up our children in communal nurseries, we can't.
This might be enough to show the inadequacy of equal opportunity as an ideal of equality, but the ultimate objection -
the one that connects with our previous discussion of equality
- is still to come. Even if we did rear our children communally,
as on a kibbutz in Israel, they would inherit different abilities
and character traits, including different levels of aggression and
different IQs. Eliminating differences in the child's environment
would not affect differences in genetic endowment. True, it
might reduce the disparity between, say, IQ scores, since it is
likely that, at present, social differences accentuate genetic differences; but the genetic differences would remain and on most
estimates they are a major component of the existing differences
in IQ. (Remember that we are now talking of individuals. We
do not know if race affects IQ, but there is little doubt that
differences in IQ between individuals of the same race are, in
part, genetically determined.)
So equality of opportunity is not an attractive ideal. It rewards
the lucky, who inherit those abilities that allow them to pursue
interesting and lucrative careers. It penalises the unlucky, whose
genes make it very hard for them to achieve similar success.
We can now fit our earlier discussion of race and sex differ39 

ences into a broader picture. Whatever the facts about the social
or genetic basis of racial differences in IQ, removing social disadvantages will not suffice to bring about an equal or a just
distribution of income - not an equal distribution, because those
who inherit the abilities associated with high IQ will continue
to earn more than those who do not; and not a just distribution
because distribution according to the abilities one inherits is
based on an arbitrary form of selection that has nothing to do
with what people deserve or need. The same is true of visualspatial ability and aggression, if these do lead to higher incomes
or status. If, as I have argued, the basis of equality is equal
consideration of interests, and the most important human interests have little or nothing to do with these factors, there is
something questionable about a society in which income and
social status correlate to a significant degree with them.
When we pay people high salaries for programming computers and low salaries for cleaning offices, we are, in effect,
paying people for having a high IQ, and this means that we are
paying people for something determined in part before they are
b om and almost wholly determined before they reach an age
at which they are responsible for their actions. From the point
of view of justice and utility there is something wrong here.
Both would be better served by a society that adopted the famous Marxist slogan: 'From each according to his ability, to
each according to his needs.' If this could be achieved, the
differences between the races and sexes would lose their social
significance. Only then would we have a society truly based on
the principle of equal consideration of interests.
Is it realistic to aim at a society that rewards people according
to their needs rather than their IQ, aggression, or other inherited
abilities? Don't we have to pay people more to be doctors or
lawyers or university professors, to do the intellectually demanding work that is essential for our well-being?
There are difficulties in paying people according to their needs
rather than their inherited abilities. If one country attempts to
40 

introduce such a scheme while others do not, the result is likely
to be some kind of 'brain drain'. We have already seen this, on
a small scale, in the number of scientists and doctors who have
left Britain to work in the United States - not because Britain
does pay people according to need rather than inherited abilities,
but because these sections of the community, though relatively
well-paid by British standards, were much better paid in the
United States. If any one country were to make a serious attempt
to equalise the salaries of doctors and manual workers, there
can be no doubt that the number of doctors emigrating would
greatly increase. This is part of the problem of 'socialism in one
country'. Marx expected the socialist revolution to be a worldwide one. When the Russian Marxists found that their revolution had not sparked off the anticipated world revolution,
they had to adapt Marxist ideas to this new situation. They did
so by harshly restricting freedom, including the freedom to emigrate. Without these restrictions, during the communist period
in the Soviet Union and other communist states, and despite
the considerable pay differentials that still did exist in those
nations when under communist rule, and that continue to exist
in the remaining communist countries, there would have been
a crippling outflow of skilled people to the capitalist nations,
which rewarded skill more highly.1
 But if 'socialism in one
country' requires making the country an armed camp, with
border guards keeping watch on the citizens within as well as
the enemy without, socialism may not be worth the price.
To allow these difficulties to lead us to the conclusion that
we can do nothing to improve the distribution of income that
now exists in capitalist countries would, however, be too pessimistic. There is, in the more affluent Western nations, a good
1 According to one observer, salary differentials in China are quite steep, in
some areas steeper than in Western nations. For instance, a full professor
gets almost seven times as much as a junior lecturer, whereas in Britain,
Australia, or the United States, the ratio is more like three to one. See Simon
Leys, Chinese Shadows (New York, 1977).
41 
1

deal of scope for reducing pay differentials before the point is
reached at which significant numbers of people begin to think
of emigrating. This is, of course, especially true of those countries, like the United States, where pay differentials are presently
very great. It is here that pressure for a more equitable distribution can best be applied.
What of the problems of redistribution within a single nation?
There is a popular belief that if we did not pay people a lot of
money to be doctors or university professors, they would not
undertake the studies required to achieve these positions. I do
not know what evidence there is in support of this assumption,
but it seems to me highly dubious. My own salary is considerably
higher than the salaries of the people employed by the university
to mow the lawns and keep the grounds clean, but if our salaries
were identical I would still not want to swap positions with
them - although their jobs are a lot more pleasant than some
lowly paid work. Nor do I believe that my doctor would jump
at a chance to change places with his receptionist if their salaries
did not differ. It is true that my doctor and I have had to study
for several years to get where we are, but I at least look back
on my student years as one of the most enjoyable periods of
my life.
Although I do not think it is because of the money that people
choose to become doctors rather than receptionists, there is one
qualification to be made to the suggestion that payment should
be based on need rather than ability. It must be admitted that
the prospect of earning more money sometimes leads people to
make greater efforts to use the abilities they have, and these
greater efforts can benefit patients, customers, students, or the
public as a whole. It might therefore be worth trying to reward
effort, which would mean paying people more if they worked
near the upper limits of their abilities, whatever those abilities
might be. This, however, is quite different from paying people
for the level of ability they happen to have, which is something
they cannot themselves control. As Jeffrey Gray, a British pro42
I 

fessor of psychology, has written, the evidence for genetic control of IQ suggests that to pay people differently for 'upper-class'
and 'lower-class' jobs is 'a wasteful use of resources in the guise
of "incentives" that either tempt people to do what is beyond
their powers or reward them more for what they would do
anyway'.
We have, up to now, been thinking of people such as university professors, who (at least in some countries) are paid by
the government, and doctors, whose incomes are determined
either by government bodies, where there is some kind of national health service, or by the government protection given to
professional associations like a medical association, which enables the profession to exclude those who might seek to advertise their services at a lower cost. These incomes are therefore
already subject to government control and could be altered
without drastically changing the powers of government. The
private business sector of the economy is a different matter.
Business people who are quick to seize an opportunity will,
under any private enterprise system, make more money than
their rivals or, if they are employed by a large corporation, may
be promoted faster. Taxation can help to redistribute some of
this income, but there are limits to how effective a steeply progressive tax system can be - there almost seems to be a law to
the effect that the higher the rate of tax, the greater the amount
of tax avoidance.
So do we have to abolish private enterprise if we are to eliminate undeserved wealth? That suggestion raises issues too large
to be discussed here; but it can be said that private enterprise
has a habit of reasserting itself under the most inhospitable
conditions. As the Russians and East Europeans soon found,
communist societies still had their black markets, and if you
wanted your plumbing fixed swiftly it was advisable to pay a
bit extra on the side. Only a radical change in human nature -
a decline in acquisitive and self-centred desires - could overcome the tendency for people to find a way around any system
43 

that suppresses private enterprise. Since no such change in human nature is in sight, we shall probably continue to pay most
to those with inherited abilities, rather than those who have
the greatest needs. To hope for something entirely different is
unrealistic. To work for wider recognition of the principle of
payment according to needs and effort rather than inherited
ability is both realistic and, I believe, right.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
The preceding section suggested that moving to a more egalitarian society in which differences of income are reduced is
ethically desirable but likely to prove difficult. Short of bringing
about general equality, we might at least attempt to ensure that
where there are important differences in income, status, and
power, women and racial minorities should not be on the worse
end in numbers disproportionate to their numbers in the community as a whole. Inequalities among members of the same
ethnic group may be no more justifiable than those between
ethnic groups, or between males and females, but when these
inequalities coincide with an obvious difference between people
like the differences between African Americans and Americans
of European descent, or between males and females, they do
more to produce a divided society with a sense of superiority
on the one side and a sense of inferiority on the other. Racial
and sexual inequality may therefore have a more divisive effect
than other forms of inequality. It may also do more to create a
feeling of hopelessness among the inferior group, since their sex
or their race is not the product of their own actions and there
is nothing they can do to change it.
How are racial and sexual equality to be achieved within an
inegalitarian society? We have seen that equality of opportunity
is practically unrealisable, and if it could be realised might allow
innate differences in aggression or IQ unfairly to determine
44 

membership of the upper strata. One way of overcoming these
obstacles is to go beyond equality of opportunity and give preferential treatment to members of disadvantaged groups. This is
affirmative action (sometimes also called 'reverse discrimination'). It may be the best hope of reducing long-standing inequalities; yet it appears to offend against the principle of
equality itself. Hence it is controversial.
Affirmative action is most often used in education and employment. Education is a particularly important area, since it
has an important influence on one's prospects of earning a high
income, holding a satisfying job, and achieving power and status
in the community. Moreover in the United States education has
been at the centre of the dispute over affirmative action because
of Supreme Court cases over university admission procedures
favouring disadvantaged groups. These cases have arisen because males of European descent were denied admission to
courses although their academic records and admission test
scores were better than those of some African American students
admitted. The universities did not deny this; they sought to
justify it by explaining that they operated admission schemes
intended to help disadvantaged students.
The leading case, as far as United States law is concerned, is
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke. Alan Bakke applied
for admission to the medical school of the University of California at Davis. In an attempt to increase the number of members
of minority groups who attended medical school, the university
reserved 16 out of every 100 places for students belonging to a
disadvantaged minority. Since these students would not have
w on SQjnany places in open competition, fewer students of
European descent were admitted than there would have been
without this reservation. Some of these students denied places
would certainly have been offered them if, scoring as they did
on the admission tests, they had been members of a disadvantaged minority. Bakke was among these rejected European
45 

American students and on being rejected he sued the university.
Let us take this case as a standard case of affirmative action. Is
it defensible?
I shall start by putting aside one argument sometimes used
to justify discrimination in favour of members of disadvantaged
groups. It is sometimes said that if, say, 20 per cent of the
population is a racial minority, and yet only 2 per cent of doctors
are from this minority, this is sufficient evidence that, somewhere along the line, our community discriminates on the basis
of race. (Similar arguments have been mounted in support of
claims of sexual discrimination.) Our discussion of the geneticsversus-environment debate indicates why this argument is inconclusive. It may be the case that members of the underrepresented group are, on average, less gifted for the kind of
study one must do to become a doctor. I am not saying that
this is true, or even probable, but it cannot be ruled out at this
stage. So a disproportionately small number of doctors from a
particular ethnic minority is not in itself proof of discrimination
against members of that minority. (Just as the disproportionately large number of African American athletes in the U.S.
Olympic athletic team is not in itself proof of discrimination
against European Americans.) There might, of course, be other
evidence suggesting that the small number of doctors from the
minority group really is the result of discrimination; but this
would need to be shown. In the absence of positive evidence
of discrimination, it is not possible to justify affirmative action
on the grounds that it merely redresses the balance of discrimination existing in the community.
Another way of defending a decision to accept a minority
student in preference to a student from the majority group who
scored higher in admission tests would be to argue that standard
tests do not give an accurate indication of ability when one
student has been severely disadvantaged. This is in line with
the point made in the last section about the impossibility of
achieving equal opportunity. Education and home background
46 

presumably influence test scores. A student with a background
of deprivation who scores 55 per cent in an admission test may
have better prospects of graduating in minimum time than a
more privileged student who scores 70 per cent. Adjusting test
scores on this basis would not mean admitting disadvantaged
minority students in preference to better-qualified students. It
would reflect a decision that the disadvantaged students really
were better qualified than the others. This is not racial discrimination.
The University of California could not attempt this defence,
for its medical school at Davis had simply reserved 16 per cent
of places for minority students. The quota did not vary according
to the ability displayed by minority applicants. This may be in
the interests of ultimate equality, but it is undeniably racial
discrimination.
In this chapter we have seen that the only defensible basis
for the claim that all humans are equal is the principle of equal
consideration of interests. That principle outlaws forms of racial
and sexual discrimination which give less weight to the interests
of those discriminated against. Could Bakke claim that in rejecting his application the medical school gave less weight to
his interests than to those of African American students?
We have only to ask this question to appreciate that university
admission is not normally a result of consideration of the interests of each applicant. It depends rather on matching the
applicants against standards that the university draws up with
certain policies in mind. Take the most straightforward case:
admission rigidly governed by scores on an intelligence test.
Suppose those rejected by this procedure complained that their
interests had been given less consideration than the interests of
applicants of higher intelligence. The university would reply that
its procedure did not take the applicants' interests into account
at all, and so could hardly give less consideration to the interests
of one applicant than it gave to others. We could then ask the
university why it used intelligence as the criterion of admission.
47 

It might say, first, that to pass the examinations required for
graduation takes a high level of intelligence. There is no point
in admitting students unable to pass, for they will not be able
to graduate. They will waste their own time and the university's
resources. Secondly, the university may say, the higher the intelligence of our graduates, the more useful they are likely to
be to the community. The more intelligent our doctors, the
better they will be at preventing and curing disease. Hence the
more intelligent the students a medical school selects, the better
value the community gets for its outlay on medical education.
This particular admission procedure is of course one-sided; a
good doctor must have other qualities in addition to a high
degree of intelligence. It is only an example, however, and that
objection is not relevant to the point I am using the example
to make. This point is that no one objects to intelligence as a
criterion for selection in the way that they object to race as a
criterion; yet those of higher intelligence admitted under an
intelligence-based scheme have no more of an intrinsic right to
admission than those admitted by reverse discrimination. Higher
intelligence, I have argued before, carries with it no right or
justifiable claim to more of the good things our society offers.
If a university admits students of higher intelligence it does so
not in consideration of their greater interest in being admitted,
nor in recognition of their right to be admitted, but because it
favours goals that it believes will be advanced by this admission
procedure. So if this same university should adopt new goals
and use affirmative action to promote them, applicants who
would have been admitted under the old procedure cannot
claim that the new procedure violates their right to be admitted,
or treats them with less respect than others. They had no special
claim to be admitted in the first place; they were the fortunate
beneficiaries of the old university policy. Now that this policy
has changed others benefit, not they. If this seems unfair, it is
only because we had become accustomed to the old policy.
So affirmative action cannot justifiably be condemned on the
48 

grounds that it violates the rights of university applicants, or
treats them with less than equal consideration. There is no inherent right to admission, and equal consideration of the interests of applicants is not involved in normal admission tests.
If affirmative action is open to objection it must be because the
goals it seeks to advance are bad, or because it will not really
promote these goals.
The principle of equality might be a ground for condemning
the goals of a racially discriminatory admissions procedure.
When universities discriminate against already disadvantaged
minorities we suspect that the discrimination really does result
from less concern for the interests of the minority. Why else did
universities in the American South excluded African Americans
until segregation was held to be unconstitutional? Here, in contrast to the affirmative action situation, those rejected could
justifiably claim that their interests were not being weighed
equally with the interests of European Americans who were
admitted. Other explanations may have been offered, but they
were surely specious.
Opponents of affirmative action have not objected to the goals
of social equality and greater minority representation in the
professions. They would be hard put to do so. Equal consideration of interests supports moves towards equality because of
the principle of diminishing marginal utility, because it relieves
the feeling of hopeless inferiority that can exist when members
of one race or sex are always worse off than members of another
race or the other sex, and because severe inequality between
races means a divided community with consequent racial
tension.
Within the overall goal of social equality, greater minority
representation in professions like law and medicine is desirable
for several reasons. Members of minority groups are more likely
to work among their own people than those who come from
the mainstream ethnic groups, and this may help to overcome
the scarcity of doctors and lawyers in poor neighbourhoods
49 

where most members of disadvantaged minorities live. They
may also have a better understanding of the problems disadvantaged people face than any outsider would have. Minority
and female doctors and lawyers can serve as role models to
other members of minority groups, and to women, breaking
down the unconscious mental barriers against aspiring to such
positions. Finally, the existence of a diverse student group will
help members of the dominant ethnic group to learn more about
the attitudes of African Americans and women, and thus become better able, as doctors and lawyers, to serve the whole
community.
Opponents of affirmative action are on stronger ground when
they claim that affirmative action will not promote equality. As
Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr., said, in the Bakke case, 'Preferential
programs may only reinforce common stereotypes holding that
certain groups are unable to achieve success without special
protection.' To achieve real equality, it might be said, members
of minority groups and women must win their places on their
merits. As long as they get into law school more easily than
others, law graduates from disadvantaged minority groups -
including those who would have got in under open competition
- will be regarded as inferior.
There is also a long-term objection to affirmative action as a
means to equality. In the present social climate we may be
confident that race will be taken into account only to benefit
disadvantaged minorities; but will this climate last? Should old
-fashioned racism return, won't our approval of racial quotas
now make it easier to turn them against minority groups? Can
we really expect the introduction of racial distinctions to advance the goal of the elimination of racial distinctions?
These practical objections raise difficult factual issues. Though
they were referred to in the Bakke case, they have not been
central in the American legal battles over affirmative action.
Judges are properly reluctant to decide cases on factual grounds
on which they have no special expertise. Alan Bakke won his
50 

case chiefly on the grounds that the U.S. Civil Rights Act of
1964 provides that no person shall, on the grounds of colour,
race, or national origin, be excluded from any activity receiving
federal financial assistance. A bare majority of the judges held
that this excluded all discrimination, benign or not. They added,
however, that there would be no objection to a university including race as one among a number of factors, like athletic or
artistic ability, work experience, demonstrated compassion, a
history of overcoming disadvantage, or leadership potential. The
court thus effectively allowed universities to choose their student body in accord with their own goals, as long as they did
not use quotas.
That may be the law in the United States, but in other countries - and in general, when we look at the issue with an eye
to ethics, rather than the law - the distinction between quotas
and other ways of giving preference to disadvantaged groups
may be less significant. The important point is that affirmative
action, whether by quotas or some other method, is not contrary
to any sound principle of equality and does not violate any
rights of those excluded by it. Properly applied, it is in keeping
with equal consideration of interests, in its aspirations at least.
The only real doubt is whether it will work. In the absence of
more promising alternatives it seems worth a try.
A CONCLUDING NOTE: EQUALITY AND DISABILITY
In this chapter we have been concerned with the interplay of
the moral principle of equality and the differences, real or alleged, between groups of people. Perhaps the clearest way of
seeing the irrelevance of IQ, or specific abilities, to the moral
principle of equality, is to consider the situation of people with
disabilities, whether physical or intellectual. When we consider
how such people are to be treated, there is no argument about
whether they are as able as people without disabilities. By definition, they are lacking at least some ability that normal people
51 

have. These disabilities will sometimes mean that they should
be treated differently from others. When we are looking for firefighters, we can justifiably exclude someone who is confined to
a wheelchair; and if we are seeking a proof-reader, a blind
person need not apply. But the fact that a specific disability may
rule a person out of consideration for a particular position does
not mean that that person's interests should be given less consideration than those of anyone else. Nor does it justify discrimination against disabled people in any situation in which the
particular disability a person has is not relevant to the employment or service offered.
For centuries, disabled people have been subjected to prejudice, in some cases no less severe than those under which
racial minorities have suffered. Intellectually disabled people
were locked up, out of sight of the public, in appalling conditions. Some were virtual slaves, exploited for cheap labour in
households or factories. Under a so-called "euthanasia program" the Nazis murdered tens of thousands of intellectually
disabled people who were quite capable of wanting to continue
living and enjoying their lives. Even today, some businesses will
not hire a person in a wheelchair for a job that she could do as
well as anyone else. Others seeking a salesperson will not hire
someone whose appearance is abnormal, for fear that sales will
fall. (Similar arguments were used against employing members
of racial minorities; we can best overcome such prejudices by
becoming used to people who are different from us.)
We are now just starting to think about the injustice that has
been done to disabled people, and to consider them as a disadvantaged group. That we have been slow in doing so may
well be due to the confusion between factual equality and moral
equality discussed earlier in this chapter. Because disabled people are different, in some respects, we have not seen it as discriminatory to treat them differently. We have overlooked the
fact that, as in the examples given above, the disabled person's
disability has been irrelevant to the different - and disadvan52 

tageous - treatment. There is therefore a need to ensure that
legislation that prohibits discrimination on grounds of race, ethnicity or gender also prohibits discrimination on the grounds of
disability, unless the disability can be shown to be relevant to
the employment or service offered.
Nor is that all. Many of the arguments for affirmative action
in the case of those disadvantaged by race or gender apply even
more strongly to disabled people. Mere equality of opportunity
will not be enough in situations in which a disability makes it
impossible to become an equal member of the community. Giving disabled people equal opportunity to attend university is
not much use if the library is accessible only by a flight of stairs
that they cannot use. Many disabled children are capable of
benefitting from normal schooling, but are prevented from taking part because additional resources are required to cope with
their special needs. Since such needs are often very central to
the lives of disabled people, the principle of equal consideration
of interests will give them much greater weight than more minor
needs of others. For this reason, it will generally be justifiable
to spend more on behalf of disabled people than we spend on
behalf of others. Just how much more is, of course, a difficult
question. Where resources are scarce, there must be some limit.
By giving equal consideration to the interests of those with
disabilities, and empathetically imagining ourselves in their situation, we can, in principle, reach the right answer; but it will
not be easy to determine what exactly, in each particular situation, that answer should be.
Some will claim to find a contradiction between this recognition of disabled people as a group that has been subjected to
unjustifiable discrimination, and arguments that appear later in
this book defending abortion and infanticide in the case of a
fetus or an infant with a severe disability. For these later arguments presuppose that life is better without a disability than
with one; and is this not itself a form of prejudice, held by
people without disabilities, and parallel to the prejudice that it
53 

is better to be a member of the European race, or a man, than
to be of African descent, or a woman?
The error in this argument is not difficult to detect. It is one
thing to argue that people with disabilities who want to live
their lives to the full should be given every possible assistance
in doing so. It is another, and quite different thing, to argue
that if we are in a position to choose, for our next child, whether
that child shall begin life with or without a disability, it is mere
prejudice or bias that leads us to choose to have a child without
a disability. If disabled people who must use wheelchairs to get
around were suddenly offered a miracle drug that would, with
no side effects, give them full use of their legs, how many of
them would refuse to take it on the grounds that life with a
disability is in no way inferior to life without a disability? In
seeking medical assistance to overcome and eliminate disability,
when it is available, disabled people themselves show that the
preference for a life without disability is no mere prejudice.
Some disabled people might say that they make this choice only
because society puts so many obstacles in the way of disabled
people. They claim that it is social conditions that disable them,
not their physical or intellectual condition. This assertions twists
the more limited truth, that social conditions make the lives of
the disabled much more difficult than they need be, into a
sweeping falsehood. To be able to walk, to see, to hear, to be
relatively free from pain and discomfort, to communicate effectively - all these are, under virtually any social conditions,
genuine benefits. To say this is not to deny that people lacking
these abilities may triumph over their disabilities and have lives
of astonishing richness and diversity. Nevertheless, we show no
prejudice against disabled people if we prefer, whether for ourselves or for our children, not to be faced with hurdles so great
that to surmount them is in itself a triumph.
54 
3
EQUALITY FOR ANIMALS?
RACISM AND SPECIESISM
I
N Chapter 2,1 gave reasons for believing that the fundamental
principle of equality, on which the equality of all human
beings rests, is the principle of equal consideration of interests.
Only a basic moral principle of this kind can allow us to defend
a form of equality that embraces all human beings, with all the
differences that exist between them. I shall now contend that
while this principle does provide an adequate basis for human
equality, it provides a basis that cannot be limited to humans.
In other words I shall suggest that, having accepted the principle
of equality as a sound moral basis for relations with others of
our own species, we are also committed to accepting it as a
sound moral basis for relations with those outside our own
species - the non-human animals.
This suggestion may at first seem bizarre. We are used to
regarding discrimination against members of racial minorities,
or against women, as among the most important moral and
political issues facing the world today. These are serious matters,
worthy of the time and energy of any concerned person. But
animals? Isn't the welfare of animals in a different category
altogether, a matter for people who are dotty about dogs and
cats? How can anyone waste their time on equality for animals
when so many humans are denied real equality?
This attitude reflects a popular prejudice against taking the
interests of animals seriously - a prejudice no better founded
than the prejudice of white slaveowners against taking the in55 

terests of their African slaves seriously. It is easy for us to criticise
the prejudices of our grandfathers, from which our fathers freed
themselves. It is more difficult to distance ourselves from our
own views, so that we can dispassionately search for prejudices
among the beliefs and values we hold. What is needed now is
a willingness to follow the arguments where they lead, without
a prior assumption that the issue is not worth our attention.
The argument for extending the principle of equality beyond
our own species is simple, so simple that it amounts to no more
than a clear understanding of the nature of the principle of equal
consideration of interests. We have seen that this principle implies that our concern for others ought not to depend on what
they are like, or what abilities they possess (although precisely
what this concern requires us to do may vary according to the
characteristics of those affected by what we do). It is on this
basis that we are able to say that the fact that some people are
not members of our race does not entitle us to exploit them,
and similarly the fact that some people are less intelligent than
others does not mean that their interests may be disregarded.
But the principle also implies that the fact that beings are not
members of our species does not entitle us to exploit them, and
similarly the fact that other animals are less intelligent than we
are does not mean that their interests may be disregarded.
We saw in Chapter 2 that many philosophers have advocated
equal consideration of interests, in some form or other, as a
basic moral principle. Only a few have recognised that the principle has applications beyond our own species, one of the few
being Jeremy Bentham, the founding father of modern utilitarianism. In a forward-looking passage, written at a time when
African slaves in the British dominions were still being treated
much as we now treat nonhuman animals, Bentham wrote:
The day may come when the rest of the animal creation may
acquire those rights which never could have been withholden
from them but by the hand of tyranny. The French have already
discovered that the blackness of the skin is no reason why a
56 
?
human being should be abandoned without redress to the caprice
of a tormentor. It may one day come to be recognised that the
number of the legs, the villosity of the skin, or the termination
of the os sacrum, are reasons equally insufficient for abandoning
a sensitive being to the same fate. What else is it that should
trace the insuperable line? Is it the faculty of reason, or perhaps
the faculty of discourse? But a fullgrown horse or dog is beyond
comparison a more rational, as well as a more conversable animal, than an infant of a day, or a week, or even a month, old.
But suppose they were otherwise, what would it avail? The
question is not. Can they reason? nor Can they talk? but, Can
they suffer?
In this passage Bentham points to the capacity for suffering as
the vital characteristic that entitles a being to equal consideration. The capacity for suffering - or more strictly, for suffering
and/or enjoyment or happiness - is not just another characteristic like the capacity for language, or for higher mathematics.
Bentham is not saying that those who try to mark 'the insuperable line' that determines whether the interests of a being
should be considered happen to have selected the wrong characteristic. The capacity for suffering and enjoying things is a
prerequisite for having interests at all, a condition that must be
satisfied before we can speak of interests in any meaningful
way. It would be nonsense to say that it was not in the interests
of a stone to be kicked along the road by a schoolboy. A stone
does not have interests because it cannot suffer. Nothing that
we can do to it could possibly make any difference to its welfare.
A mouse, on the other hand, does have an interest in not being
tormented, because mice will suffer if they are treated in this
way.
If a being suffers, there can be no moral justification for refusing to take that suffering into consideration. No matter what
the nature of the being, the principle of equality requires that
the suffering be counted equally with the like suffering - in so
far as rough comparisons can be made - of any other being. If
a being is not capable of suffering, or of experiencing enjoyment
57 

or happiness, there is nothing to be taken into account. This is
why the limit of sentience (using the term as a convenient, if
not strictly accurate, shorthand for the capacity to suffer or
experience enjoyment or happiness) is the only defensible
boundary of concern for the interests of others. To mark this
boundary by some characteristic like intelligence or rationality
would be to mark it in an arbitrary way. Why not choose some
other characteristic, like skin colour?
Racists violate the principle of equality by giving greater
weight to the interests of members of their own race when there
is a clash between their interests and the interests of those of
another race. Racists of European descent typically have not
accepted that pain matters as much when it is felt by Africans,
for example, as when it is felt by Europeans. Similarly those I
would call 'speciesists' give greater weight to the interests of
members of their own species when there is a clash between
their interests and the interests of those of other species. Human
speciesists do not accept that pain is as bad when it is felt by
pigs or mice as when it is felt by humans.
That, then, is really the whole of the argument for extending
the principle of equality to nonhuman animals; but there may
be some doubts about what this equality amounts to in practice.
In particular, the last sentence of the previous paragraph may
prompt some people to reply: 'Surely pain felt by a mouse just
is not as bad as pain felt by a human. Humans have much
greater awareness of what is happening to them, and this makes
their suffering worse. You can't equate the suffering of, say, a
person dying slowly from cancer, and a laboratory mouse undergoing the same fate.'
I fully accept that in the case described the human cancer
victim normally suffers more than the nonhuman cancer victim.
This in no way undermines the extension of equal consideration
of interests to nonhumans. It means, rather, that we must take
care when we compare the interests of different species. In some
situations a member of one species will suffer more than a
58 
?
member of another species. In this case we should still apply
the principle of equal consideration of interests but the result
of so doing is, of course, to give priority to relieving the greater
suffering. A simpler case may help to make this clear.
If I give a horse a hard slap across its rump with my open
hand, the horse may start, but it presumably feels little pain. Its
skin is thick enough to protect it against a mere slap. If I slap
a baby in the same way, however, the baby will cry and presumably does feel pain, for the baby's skin is more sensitive. So
it is worse to slap a baby than a horse, if both slaps are administered with equal force. But there must be some kind of blow
- I don't know exactly what it would be, but perhaps a blow
with a heavy stick - that would cause the horse as much pain
as we cause a baby by a simple slap. That is what I mean by
'the same amount of pain' and if we consider it wrong to inflict
that much pain on a baby for no good reason then we must,
unless we are speciesists, consider it equally wrong to inflict the
same amount of pain on a horse for no good reason.
There are other differences between humans and animals that
cause other complications. Normal adult human beings have
mental capacities that will, in certain circumstances, lead them
to suffer more than animals would in the same circumstances.
If, for instance, we decided to perform extremely painful or
lethal scientific experiments on normal adult humans, kidnapped at random from public parks for this purpose, adults
w ho entered parks would become fearful that they would be
kidnapped. The resultant terror would be a form of suffering
additional to the pain of the experiment. The same experiments
performed on nonhuman animals would cause less suffering
since the animals would not have the anticipatory dread of being
kidnapped and experimented upon. This does not mean, of
course, that it would be right to perform the experiment on
animals, but only that there is a reason, and one that is not
speciesist, for preferring to use animals rather than normal adult
humans, if the experiment is to be done at all. Note, however,
59 

that this same argument gives us a reason for preferring to use
human infants - orphans perhaps - or severely intellectually
disabled humans for experiments, rather than adults, since infants and severely intellectually disabled humans would also
have no idea of what was going to happen to them. As far as
this argument is concerned, nonhuman animals and infants and
severely intellectually disabled humans are in the same category; and if we use this argument to justify experiments on
nonhuman animals we have to ask ourselves whether we are
also prepared to allow experiments on human infants and severely intellectually disabled adults. If we make a distinction
between animals and these humans, how can we do it, other
than on the basis of a morally indefensible preference for members of our own species?
There are many areas in which the superior mental powers
of normal adult humans make a difference: anticipation, more
detailed memory, greater knowledge of what is happening, and
so on. These differences explain why a human dying from cancer
is likely to suffer more than a mouse. It is the mental anguish
that makes the human's position so much harder to bear. Yet
these differences do not all point to greater suffering on the part
of the normal human being. Sometimes animals may suffer
more because of their more limited understanding. If, for instance, we are taking prisoners in wartime we can explain to
them that while they must submit to capture, search, and confinement they will not otherwise be harmed and will be set free
at the conclusion of hostilities. If we capture wild animals, however, we cannot explain that we are not threatening their lives.
A wild animal cannot distinguish an attempt to overpower and
confine from an attempt to kill; the one causes as much terror
as the other.
It may be objected that comparisons of the sufferings of different species are impossible to make, and that for this reason
when the interests of animals and humans clash, the principle
of equality gives no guidance. It is true that comparisons of
60 
?
suffering between members of different species cannot be made
precisely. Nor, for that matter, can comparisons of suffering
between different human beings be made precisely. Precision is
not essential. As we shall see shortly, even if we were to prevent
the infliction of suffering on animals only when the interests of
humans will not be affected to anything like the extent that
animals are affected, we would be forced to make radical
changes in our treatment of animals that would involve our
diet, the farming methods we use, experimental procedures in
many fields of science, our approach to wildlife and to hunting,
trapping and the wearing of furs, and areas of entertainment
like circuses, rodeos, and zoos. As a result, the total quantity of
suffering caused would be greatly reduced; so greatly that it is
hard to imagine any other change of moral attitude that would
cause so great a reduction in the total sum of suffering in the
universe.
So far I have said a lot about the infliction of suffering on
animals, but nothing about killing them. This omission has been
deliberate. The application of the principle of equality to the
infliction of suffering is, in theory at least, fairly straightforward.
Pain and suffering are bad and should be prevented or minimised, irrespective of the race, sex, or species of the being that
suffers. How bad a pain is depends on how intense it is and
how long it lasts, but pains of the same intensity and duration
are equally bad, whether felt by humans or animals. When we
come to consider the value of life, we cannot say quite so confidently that a life is a life, and equally valuable, whether it is
a human life or an animal life. It would not be speciesist to hold
that the life of a self-aware being, capable of abstract thought,
of planning for the future, of complex acts of communication,
and so on, is more valuable than the life of a being without
these capacities. (I am not saying whether this view is justifiable
or not; only that it cannot simply be rejected as speciesist, because it is not on the basis of species itself that one life is held
61 

to be more valuable than another.) The value of life is a notoriously difficult ethical question, and we can only arrive at a
reasoned conclusion about the comparative value of human and
animal life after we have discussed the value of life in general.
This is a topic for a separate chapter. Meanwhile there are important conclusions to be derived from the extension beyond
our own species of the principle of equal consideration of interests, irrespective of our conclusions about the value of life.
SPECIESISM IN PRACTICE
Animals as Food
For most people in modern, urbanised societies, the principal
form of contact with nonhuman animals is at meal times. The
use of animals for food is probably the oldest and the most
widespread form of animal use. There is also a sense in which
it is the most basic form of animal use, the foundation stone on
which rests the belief that animals exist for our pleasure and
convenience.
If animals count in their own right, our use of animals for
food becomes questionable - especially when animal flesh is a
luxury rather than a necessity. Eskimos living in an environment
where they must kill animals for food or starve might be justified
in claiming that their interest in surviving overrides that of the
animals they kill. Most of us cannot defend our diet in this way.
Citizens of industrialised societies can easily obtain an adequate
diet without the use of animal flesh. The overwhelming weight
of medical evidence indicates that animal flesh is not necessary
for good health or longevity. Nor is animal production in industrialised societies an efficient way of producing food, since
most of the animals consumed have been fattened on grains
and other foods that we could have eaten directly. When we
feed these grains to animals, only about 10 per cent of the
nutritional value remains as meat for human consumption. So,
62 
?
with the exception of animals raised entirely on grazing land
unsuitable for crops, animals are eaten neither for health, nor
to increase our food supply. Their flesh is a luxury, consumed
because people like its taste.
In considering the ethics of the use of animal flesh for human
food in industrialised societies, we are considering a situation
in which a relatively minor human interest must be balanced
against the lives and welfare of the animals involved. The principle of equal consideration of interests does not allow major
interests to be sacrificed for minor interests.
The case against using animals for food is at its strongest when
animals are made to lead miserable lives so that their flesh can
be made available to humans at the lowest possible cost. Modern
forms of intensive farming apply science and technology to the
attitude that animals are objects for us to use. In order to have
meat on the table at a price that people can afford, our society
tolerates methods of meat production that confine sentient animals in cramped, unsuitable conditions for the entire duration
of their lives. Animals are treated like machines that convert
fodder into flesh, and any innovation that results in a higher
'conversion ratio' is liable to be adopted. As one authority on
the subject has said, 'Cruelty is acknowledged only when profitability ceases.' To avoid speciesism we must stop these practices. Our custom is all the support that factory farmers need.
The decision to cease giving them that support may be difficult,
but it is less difficult than it would have been for a white Southerner to go against the traditions of his society and free his slaves;
if we do not change our dietary habits, how can we censure
those slaveholders who would not change their own way of
living?
These arguments apply to animals who have been reared in
factory farms - which means that we should not eat chicken,
pork, or veal, unless we know that the meat we are eating was
not produced by factory farm methods. The same is true of beef
that has come from cattle kept in crowded feedlots (as most
63 

beef does in the United States). Eggs will come from hens kept
in small wire cages, too small even to allow them to stretch
their wings, unless the eggs are specifically sold as 'free range'
(or unless one lives in a relatively enlightened country like
Switzerland, which has prohibited the cage system of keeping
hens).
These arguments do not take us all the way to a vegetarian
diet, since some animals, for instance sheep, and in some countries cattle, still graze freely outdoors. This could change. The
American pattern of fattening cattle in crowded feedlots is
spreading to other countries. Meanwhile, the lives of free-ranging animals are undoubtedly better than those of animals reared
in factory farms. It is still doubtful if using them for food is
compatible with equal consideration of interests. One problem
is, of course, that using them as food involves killing them -
but this is an issue to which, as I have said, we shall return
when we have discussed the value of life in the next chapter.
Apart from taking their lives there are also many other things
done to animals in order to bring them cheaply to our dinner
table. Castration, the separation of mother and young, the
breaking up of herds, branding, transporting, and finally the
moments of slaughter - all of these are likely to involve suffering
and do not take the animals' interests into account. Perhaps
animals could be reared on a small scale without suffering in
these ways, but it does not seem economical or practical to do
so on the scale required for feeding our large urban populations.
In any case, the important question is not whether animal flesh
could be produced without suffering, but whether the flesh we
are considering buying was produced without suffering. Unless
we can be confident that it was, the principle of equal consideration of interests implies that it was wrong to sacrifice important interests of the animal in order to satisfy less important
interests of our own; consequently we should boycott the end
result of this process.
For those of us living in cities where it is difficult to know
64 
?
how the animals we might eat have lived and died, this conclusion brings us close to a vegetarian way of life. I shall consider
some objections to it in the final section of this chapter.
Experimenting on Animals
Perhaps the area in which speciesism can most clearly be observed is the use of animals in experiments. Here the issue stands
out starkly, because experimenters often seek to justify experimenting on animals by claiming that the experiments lead us
to discoveries about humans; if this is so, the experimenter must
agree that human and nonhuman animals are similar in crucial
respects. For instance, if forcing a rat to choose between starving
to death and crossing an electrified grid to obtain food tells us
anything about the reactions of humans to stress, we must assume that the rat feels stress in this kind of situation.
People sometimes think that all animal experiments serve
vital medical purposes, and can be justified on the grounds that
they relieve more suffering than they cause. This comfortable
belief is mistaken. Drug companies test new shampoos and cosmetics they are intending to market by dripping concentrated
solutions of them into the eyes of rabbits, in a test known as
the Draize test. (Pressure from the animal liberation movement
has led several cosmetic companies to abandon this practice.
An alternative test, not using animal, has now been found.
Nevertheless, many companies, including some of the largest,
still continue to perform the Draize test.) Food additives, including artificial colourings and preservatives, are tested by what
is known as the LD50 - a test designed to find the 'lethal dose',
or level of consumption that will make 50 per cent of a sample
of animals die. In the process nearly all of the animals are made
very sick before some finally die and others pull through. These
tests are not necessary to prevent human suffering: even if there
were no alternative to the use of animals to test the safety of
the products, we already have enough shampoos and food col65 

ourings. There is no need to develop new ones that might be
dangerous.
In many countries, the armed forces perform atrocious experiments on animals that rarely come to light. To give just one
example: at the U.S. Armed Forces Radiobiology Institute, in
Bethesda, Maryland, rhesus monkeys have been trained to run
inside a large wheel. If they slow down too much, the wheel
slows down, too, and the monkeys get an electric shock. Once
the monkeys are trained to run for long periods, they are given
lethal doses of radiation. Then, while sick and vomiting, they
are forced to continue to run until they drop. This is supposed
to provide information on the capacities of soldiers to continue
to fight after a nuclear attack.
Nor can all university experiments be defended on the
grounds that they relieve more suffering than they inflict. Three
experimenters at Princeton University kept 256 young rats without food or water until they died. They concluded that young
rats under conditions of fatal thirst and starvation are much
more active than normal adult rats given food and water. In a
well-known series of experiments that went on for more than
fifteen years, H. F. Harlow of the Primate Research Center, Madison, Wisconsin, reared monkeys under conditions of maternal
deprivation and total isolation. He found that in this way he
could reduce the monkeys to a state in which, when placed
among normal monkeys, they sat huddled in a corner in a
condition of persistent depression and fear. Harlow also produced monkey mothers so neurotic that they smashed their
infant's face into the floor and rubbed it back and forth. Although Harlow himself is no longer alive, some of his former
students at other U.S. universities continue to perform variations
on his experiments.
In these cases, and many others like them, the benefits to
humans are either nonexistent or uncertain, while the losses to
members of other species are certain and real. Hence the ex66 
?
periments indicate a failure to give equal consideration to the
interests of all beings, irrespective of species.
In the past, argument about animal experimentation has often
missed this point because it has been put in absolutist terms:
would the opponent of experimentation be prepared to let thousands die from a terrible disease that could be cured by experimenting on one animal? This is a purely hypothetical question,
since experiments do not have such dramatic results, but as long
as its hypothetical nature is clear, I think the question should
be answered affirmatively - in other words, if one, or even a
dozen animals had to suffer experiments in order to save thousands, I would think it right and in accordance with equal
consideration of interests that they should do so. This, at any
rate, is the answer a utilitarian must give. Those who believe
in absolute rights might hold that it is always wrong to sacrifice
one being, whether human or animal, for the benefit of another.
In that case the experiment should not be carried out, whatever
the consequences.
To the hypothetical question about saving thousands of people through a single experiment on an animal, opponents of
speciesism can reply with a hypothetical question of their own:
would experimenters be prepared to perform their experiments
on orphaned humans with severe and irreversible brain damage
if that were the only way to save thousands? (I say 'orphaned'
in order to avoid the complication of the feelings of the human
parents.) If experimenters are not prepared to use orphaned
humans with severe and irreversible brain damage, their readiness to use nonhuman animals seems to discriminate on the
basis of species alone, since apes, monkeys, dogs, cats, and even
mice and rats are more intelligent, more aware of what is happening to them, more sensitive to pain, and so on, than many
severely braindamaged humans barely surviving in hospital
wards and other institutions. There seems to be no morally
relevant characteristic that such humans have that nonhuman
67 

animals lack. Experimenters, then, show bias in favour of their
own species whenever they carry out experiments on nonhuman animals for purposes that they would not think justified
them in using human beings at an equal or lower level of sentience, awareness, sensitivity, and so on. If this bias were eliminated, the number of experiments performed on animals would
be greatly reduced.
Other Forms of Speciesism
I have concentrated on the use of animals as food and in research, since these are examples of large-scale, systematic speciesism. They are not, of course, the only areas in which the
principle of equal consideration of interests, extended beyond
the human species, has practical implications. There are many
other areas that raise similar issues, including the fur trade,
hunting in all its different forms, circuses, rodeos, zoos, and the
pet business. Since the philosophical questions raised by these
issues are not very different from those raised by the use of
animals as food and in research, I shall leave it to the reader to
apply the appropriate ethical principles to them.
SOME OBJECTIONS
I first put forward the views outlined in this chapter in 1973.
At that time there was no animal liberation or animal rights
movement. Since then a movement has sprung up, and some
of the worst abuses of animals, like the Draize and LD50 tests,
are now less widespread, even though they have not been eliminated. The fur trade has come under attack, and as a result fur
sales have declined dramatically in countries like Britain, the
Netherlands, Australia, and the United States. Some countries
are also starting to phase out the most confining forms of factory
farming. As already mentioned, Switzerland has prohibited the
cage system of keeping laying hens. Britain has outlawed the
68 
?
raising of calves in individual stalls, and is phasing out individual
stalls for pigs. Sweden, as in other areas of social reform, is in
the lead here, too: in 1988 the Swedish Parliament passed a
law that will, over a ten-year period, lead to the elimination of
all systems of factory farming that confine animals for long
periods and prevent them carrying out their natural behaviour.
Despite this increasing acceptance of many aspects of the case
for animal liberation, and the slow but tangible progress made
on behalf of animals, a variety of objections have emerged, some
straightforward and predictable, some more subtle and unexpected. In this final section of the chapter I shall attempt to
answer the most important of these objections. I shall begin
with the more straightforward ones.
How Do We Know That Animals Can Feel Pain?
We can never directly experience the pain of another being,
whether that being is human or not. When I see my daughter
fall and scrape her knee, I know that she feels pain because of
the way she behaves - she cries, she tells me her knee hurts,
she rubs the sore spot, and so on. I know that I myself behave
in a somewhat similar - if more inhibited - way when I feel
pain, and so I accept that my daughter feels something like what
I feel when I scrape my knee.
The basis of my belief that animals can feel pain is similar to
the basis of my belief that my daughter can feel pain. Animals
in pain behave in much the same way as humans do, and their
behaviour is sufficient justification for the belief that they feel
pain. It is true that, with the exception of those apes who have
been taught to communicate by sign language, they cannot
actually say that they are feeling pain - but then when my
daughter was very young she could not talk, either. She found
other ways to make her inner states apparent, thereby demonstrating that we can be sure that a being is feeling pain even
if the being cannot use language.
69 

To back up our inference from animal behaviour, we can
point to the fact that the nervous systems of all vertebrates, and
especially of birds and mammals, are fundamentally similar.
Those parts of the human nervous system that are concerned
with feeling pain are relatively old, in evolutionary terms. Unlike
the cerebral cortex, which developed fully only after our ancestors diverged from other mammals, the basic nervous system
evolved in more distant ancestors common to ourselves and the
other 'higher' animals. This anatomical parallel makes it likely
that the capacity of animals to feel is similar to our own.
It is significant that none of the grounds we have for believing
that animals feel pain hold for plants. We cannot observe behaviour suggesting pain - sensational claims to the contrary
have not been substantiated - and plants do not have a centrally
organised nervous system like ours.
Animals Eat Each Other, So Why Shouldn't We
Eat Them?
This might be called the Benjamin Franklin Objection. Franklin
recounts in his Autobiography that he was for a time a vegetarian
but his abstinence from animal flesh came to an end when he
was watching some friends prepare to fry a fish they had just
caught. When the fish was cut open, it was found to have a
smaller fish in its stomach. 'Well', Franklin said to himself, 'if
you eat one another, I don't see why we may not eat you' and
he proceeded to do so.
Franklin was at least honest. In telling this story, he confesses
that he convinced himself of the validity of the objection only
after the fish was already in the frying pan and smelling 'admirably well'; and he remarks that one of the advantages of
being a 'reasonable creature' is that one can find a reason for
whatever one wants to do. The replies that can be made to this
objection are so obvious that Franklin's acceptance of it does
testify more to his love of fried fish than to his powers of reason.
70 
?
For a start, most animals who kill for food would not be able
to survive if they did not, whereas we have no need to eat
animal flesh. Next, it is odd that humans, who normally think
of the behaviour of animals as 'beastly' should, when it suits
them, use an argument that implies that we ought to look to
animals for moral guidance. The most decisive point, however,
is that nonhuman animals are not capable of considering the
alternatives open to them or of reflecting on the ethics of their
diet. Hence it is impossible to hold the animals responsible for
what they do, or to judge that because of their killing they
'deserve' to be treated in a similar way. Those who read these
lines, on the other hand, must consider the justifiability of their
dietary habits. You cannot evade responsibility by imitating
beings who are incapable of making this choice.
Sometimes people point to the fact that animals eat each other
in order to make a slightly different point. This fact suggests,
they think, not that animals deserve to be eaten, but rather that
there is a natural law according to which the stronger prey upon
the weaker, a kind of Darwinian 'survival of the fittest' in which
by eating animals we are merely playing our part.
This interpretation of the objection makes two basic mistakes,
one a mistake of fact and the other an error of reasoning. The
factual mistake lies in the assumption that our own consumption of animals is part of the natural evolutionary process. This
might be true of a few primitive cultures that still hunt for food,
but it has nothing to do with the mass production of domestic
animals in factory farms.
Suppose that we did hunt for our food, though, and this was
part of some natural evolutionary process. There would still be
an error of reasoning in the assumption that because this process
is natural it is right. It is, no doubt, 'natural' for women to
produce an infant every year or two from puberty to menopause,
but this does not mean that it is wrong to interfere with this
process. We need to know the natural laws that affect us in
order to estimate the consequences of what we do; but we do
71 

not have to assume that the natural way of doing something is
incapable of improvement.
Differences between Humans and Animals
That there is a huge gulf between humans and animals was
unquestioned for most of the course of Western civilisation. The
basis of this assumption has been undermined by Darwin's discovery of our animal origins and the associated decline in the
credibility of the story of our Divine Creation, made in the image
of God with an immortal soul. Some have found it difficult to
accept that the differences between us and the other animals
are differences of degree rather than kind. They have searched
for ways of drawing a line between humans and animals. To
date these boundaries have been shortlived. For instance, it used
to be said that only humans used tools. Then it was observed
that the Galapagos woodpecker used a cactus thorn to dig insects
out of crevices in trees. Next it was suggested that even if other
animals used tools, humans are the only toolmaking animals.
But Jane Goodall found that chimpanzees in the jungles of
Tanzania chewed up leaves to make a sponge for sopping up
water, and trimmed the leaves off branches to make tools for
catching insects. The use of language was another boundary
line - but now chimpanzees, gorillas, and an orangutan have
learnt Ameslan, the sign language of the deaf, and there is some
evidence suggesting that whales and dolphins may have a complex language of their own.
If these attempts to draw the line between humans and animals had fitted the facts of the situation, they would still not
carry any moral weight. As Bentham pointed out, the fact that
a being does not use language or make tools is hardly a reason
for ignoring its suffering. Some philosophers have claimed that
there is a more profound difference. They have claimed that
animals cannot think or reason, and that accordingly they have
72 
?
no conception of themselves, no self-consciousness. They live
from instant to instant, and do not see themselves as distinct
entities with a past and a future. Nor do they have autonomy,
the ability to choose how to live one's life. It has been suggested
that autonomous, self-conscious beings are in some way much
more valuable, more morally significant, than beings who live
from moment to moment, without the capacity to see themselves as distinct beings with a past and a future. Accordingly,
on this view, the interests of autonomous, self-conscious beings
ought normally to take priority over the interests of other beings.
I shall not now consider whether some nonhuman animals
are self-conscious and autonomous. The reason for this omission
is that I do not believe that, in the present context, much depends on this question. We are now considering only the application of the principle of equal consideration of interests. In
the next chapter, when we discuss questions about the value
of life, we shall see that there are reasons for holding that selfconsciousness is crucial in debates about whether a being has
a right to life; and we shall then investigate the evidence for
self-consciousness in nonhuman animals. Meanwhile the more
important issue is: does the fact that a being is self-conscious
entitle that being to some kind of priority of consideration?
The claim that self-conscious beings are entitled to prior consideration is compatible with the principle of equal consideration of interests if it amounts to no more than the claim that
something that happens to self-conscious beings can be contrary
to their interests while similar events would not be contrary to
the interests of beings who were not self-conscious. This might
be because the self-conscious creature has greater awareness of
what is happening, can fit the event into the overall framework
of a longer time period, has different desires, and so on. But
this is a point I granted at the start of this chapter, and provided
that it is not carried to ludicrous extremes - like insisting that
if I am self-conscious and a veal calf is not, depriving me of veal
73 

causes more suffering than depriving the calf of his freedom to
walk, stretch and eat grass - it is not denied by the criticisms I
made of animal experimentation and factory farming.
It would be a different matter if it were claimed that, even
when a self-conscious being did not suffer more than a being
that was merely sentient, the suffering of the self-conscious
being is more important because these are more valuable types
of being. This introduces nonutilitarian claims of value - claims
that do not derive simply from taking a universal standpoint in
the manner described in the final section of Chapter 1. Since
the argument for utilitarianism developed in that section was
admittedly tentative, I cannot use that argument to rule out all
nonutilitarian values. Nevertheless we are entitled to ask why
self-conscious beings should be considered more valuable and
in particular why the alleged greater value of a self-conscious
being should result in preferring the lesser interests of a selfconscious being to the greater interests of a merely sentient
being, even where the self-consciousness of the former being is
not itself at stake. This last point is an important one, for we
are not now considering cases in which the lives of self-conscious beings are at risk but cases in which self-conscious beings
will go on living, their faculties intact, whatever we decide. In
these cases, if the existence of self-consciousness does not affect
the nature of the interests under comparison, it is not clear why
we should drag self-consciousness into the discussion at all, any
more than we should drag species, race or sex into similar discussions. Interests are interests, and ought to be given equal
consideration whether they are the interests of human or nonhuman animals, self-conscious or non-self-conscious animals.
There is another possible reply to the claim that selfconsciousness, or autonomy, or some similar characteristic, can
serve to distinguish human from nonhuman animals: recall that
there are intellectually disabled humans who have less claim to
be regarded as self-conscious or autonomous than many nonhuman animals. If we use these characteristics to place a gulf
74
J 
?
between humans and other animals, we place these less able
humans on the other side of the gulf; and if the gulf is taken
to mark a difference in moral status, then these humans would
have the moral status of animals rather than humans.
This reply is forceful, because most of us find horrifying the
idea of using intellectually disabled humans in painful experiments, or fattening them for gourmet dinners. But some philosophers have argued that these consequences would not really
follow from the use of a characteristic like self-consciousness or
autonomy to distinguish humans from other animals. I shall
consider three of these attempts.
The first suggestion is that severely intellectually disabled humans who do not possess the capacities that mark the normal
human off from other animals should nevertheless be treated
as if they did possess these capacities, since they belong to a
species, members of which normally do possess them. The suggestion is, in other words, that we treat individuals not in accordance with their actual qualities, but in accordance with the
qualities normal for their species.
It is interesting that this suggestion should be made in defence
of treating members of our species better than members of another species, when it would be firmly rejected if it were used
to justify treating members of our race or sex better than members of another race or sex. In the previous chapter, when discussing the impact of possible differences in IQ between
members of different ethnic groups, I made the obvious point
that whatever the difference between the average scores for different groups, some members of the group with the lower average score will do better than some members of groups with
the higher average score, and so we ought to treat people as
individuals and not according to the average score for their
ethnic group, whatever the explanation of that average might
be. If we accept this we cannot consistently accept the suggestion
that when dealing with severely intellectually disabled humans
we should grant them the status or rights normal for their spe75 

cies. For what is the significance of the fact that this time the
line is to be drawn around the species rather than around the
race or sex? We cannot insist that beings be treated as individuals in the one case, and as members of a group in the other.
Membership of a species is no more relevant in these circumstances than membership of a race or sex.
A second suggestion is that although severely intellectually
disabled humans may not possess higher capacities than other
animals, they are nonetheless human beings, and as such we
have special relations with them that we do not have with other
animals. As one reviewer of Animal Liberation put it: 'Partiality
for our own species, and within it for much smaller groupings
is, like the universe, something we had better accept . . . The
danger in an attempt to eliminate partial affections is that it
may remove the source of all affections.'
This argument ties morality too closely to our affections. Of
course some people may have a closer relationship with the
most profoundly intellectually disabled human than they do
with any nonhuman animal, and it would be absurd to tell
them that they should not feel this way. They simply do, and
as such there is nothing good or bad about it. The question is
whether our moral obligations to a being should be made to
depend on our feelings in this manner. Notoriously, some human beings have a closer relationship with their cat than with
their neighbours. Would those who tie morality to affections
accept that these people are justified in saving their cats from
a fire before they save their neighbours? And even those who
are prepared to answer this question affirmatively would, I trust,
not want to go along with racists who could argue that if people
have more natural relationships with, and greater affection towards, others of their own race, it is all right for them to give
preference to the interests of other members of their own race.
Ethics does not demand that we eliminate personal relationships
and partial affections, but it does demand that when we act we
76 
?
assess the moral claims of those affected by our actions with
some degree of independence from our feelings for them.
The third suggestion invokes the widely used 'slippery slope'
argument. The idea of this argument is that once we take one
step in a certain direction we shall find ourselves on a slippery
slope and shall slither further than we wished to go. In the
present context the argument is used to suggest that we need
a clear line to divide those beings we can experiment upon,
or fatten for dinner, from those we cannot. Species membership makes a nice sharp dividing line, whereas levels of selfconsciousness, autonomy, or sentience do not. Once we allow
that an intellectually disabled human being has no higher moral
status than an animal, the argument goes, we have begun our
descent down a slope, the next level of which is denying rights
to social misfits, and the bottom of which is a totalitarian government disposing of any groups it does not like by classifying
them as subhuman.
The slippery slope argument may serve as a valuable warning
in some contexts, but it cannot bear too much weight. If we
believe that, as I have argued in this chapter, the special status
we now give to humans allows us to ignore the interests of
billions of sentient creatures, we should not be deterred from
trying to rectify this situation by the mere possibility that the
principles on which we base this attempt will be misused by
evil rulers for their own ends. And it is no more than a possibility. The change I have suggested might make no difference
to our treatment of humans, or it might even improve it.
In the end, no ethical line that is arbitrarily drawn can be
secure. It is better to find a line that can be defended openly
and honestly. When discussing euthanasia in Chapter 7 we shall
see that a line drawn in the wrong place can have unfortunate
results even for those placed on the higher, or human side of
the line.
It is also important to remember that the aim of my argument
77 

is to elevate the status of animals rather than to lower the status
of any humans. I do not wish to suggest that intellectually
disabled humans should be force-fed with food colourings until
half of them die - although this would certainly give us a more
accurate indication of whether the substance was safe for humans than testing it on rabbits or dogs does. I would like our
conviction that it would be wrong to treat intellectually disabled
humans in this way to be transferred to nonhuman animals at
similar levels of self-consciousness and with similar capacities
for suffering. It is excessively pessimistic to refrain from trying
to alter our attitudes on the grounds that we might start treating
intellectually disabled humans with the same lack of concern
we now have for animals, rather than give animals the greater
concern that we now have for intellectually disabled humans.
Ethics and Reciprocity
In the earliest surviving major work of moral philosophy in the
Western tradition, Plato's Republic, there is to be found the following view of ethics:
They say that to do injustice is, by nature, good; to suffer injustice,
evil; but that there is more evil in the latter than good in the
former. And so when men have both done and suffered injustice
and have had experience of both, any who are not able to avoid
the one and obtain the other, think that they had better agree
among themselves to have neither; hence they begin to establish
laws and mutual covenants; and that which is ordained by law
is termed by them lawful and just. This, it is claimed, is the origin
and nature of justice - it is a mean or compromise, between the
best of all, which is to do injustice and not be punished, and the
worst of all, which is to suffer injustice without the power of
retaliation.
This was not Plato's own view; he put it into the mouth of
Glaucon in order to allow Socrates, the hero of his dialogue, to
refute it. It is a view that has never gained general acceptance,
but has not died away either. Echoes of it can be found in the
78 
?
ethical theories of contemporary philosophers like John Rawls
and David Gauthier; and it has been used, by these philosophers
and others, to justify the exclusion of animals from the sphere
of ethics, or at least from its core. For if the basis of ethics is
that I refrain from doing nasty things to others as long as they
don't do nasty things to me, I have no reason against doing
nasty things to those who are incapable of appreciating my
restraint and controlling their conduct towards me accordingly.
Animals, by and large, are in this category. When I am surfing
far out from shore and a shark attacks, my concern for animals
will not help; I am as likely to be eaten as the next surfer,
though he may spend every Sunday afternoon taking potshots
at sharks from a boat. Since animals cannot reciprocate, they
are, on this view, outside the limits of the ethical contract.
In assessing this conception of ethics we should distinguish
between explanations of the origin of ethical judgments, and
justifications of these judgments. The explanation of the origin
of ethics in terms of a tacit contract between people for their
mutual benefit has a certain plausibility (though in view of the
quasi-ethical social rules that have been observed in the societies
of other mammals, it is obviously a historical fantasy). But we
could accept this account, as a historical explanation, without
thereby committing ourselves to any views about the lightness
or wrongness of the ethical system that has resulted. No matter
how self-interested the origins of ethics may be, it is possible
that once we have started thinking ethically we are led beyond
these mundane premises. For we are capable of reasoning, and
reason is not subordinate to self-interest. When we are reasoning about ethics, we are using concepts that, as we saw in the
first chapter of this book, take us beyond our own personal
interest, or even the interest of some sectional group. According
to the contract view of ethics, this universalising process should
stop at the boundaries of our community; but once the process
has begun we may come to see that it would not be consistent
with our other convictions to halt at that point. Just as the first
79 

mathematicians, who may have started counting in order to
keep track of the number of people in their tribe, had no idea
that they were taking the first steps along a path that would
lead to the infinitesimal calculus, so the origin of ethics tells us
nothing about where it will end.
When we turn to the question of justification, we can see that
contractual accounts of ethics have many problems. Clearly,
such accounts exclude from the ethical sphere a lot more than
nonhuman animals. Since severely intellectually disabled humans are equally incapable of reciprocating, they must also be
excluded. The same goes for infants and very young children;
but the problems of the contractual view are not limited to these
special cases. The ultimate reason for entering into the ethical
contract is, on this view, self-interest. Unless some additional
universal element is brought in, one group of people has no
reason to deal ethically with another if it is not in their interest
to do so. If we take this seriously we shall have to revise our
ethical judgments drastically. For instance, the white slave traders who transported African slaves to America had no selfinterested reason for treating Africans any better than they did.
The Africans had no way of retaliating. If they had only been
contractualists, the slave traders could have rebutted the abolitionists by explaining to them that ethics stops at the boundaries of the community, and since Africans are not part of their
community they have no duties to them.
Nor is it only past practices that would be affected by taking
the contractual model seriously. Though people often speak of
the world today as a single community, there is no doubt that
the power of people in, say, Chad, to reciprocate either good
or evil that is done to them by, say, citizens of the United States
is limited. Hence it does not seem that the contract view provides
for any obligations on the part of wealthy nations to poorer
nations.
Most striking of all is the impact of the contract model on
80 
?
our attitude to future generations. 'Why should I do anything
for posterity? What has posterity ever done for me?' would be
the view we ought to take if only those who can reciprocate
are within the bounds of ethics. There is no way in which those
w ho will be alive in the year 2100 can do anything to make
our lives better or worse. Hence if obligations only exist where
there can be reciprocity, we need have no worries about problems like the disposal of nuclear waste. True, some nuclear
wastes will still be deadly for a quarter of a million years; but
as long as we put it in containers that will keep it away from
us for 100 years, we have done all that ethics demands of us.
These examples should suffice to show that, whatever its
origin, the ethics we have now does go beyond a tacit understanding between beings capable of reciprocity. The prospect of
returning to such a basis will, I trust, not be appealing. Since
no account of the origin of morality compels us to base our
morality on reciprocity, and since no other arguments in favour
of this conclusion have been offered, we should reject this view
of ethics.
At this point in the discussion some contract theorists appeal
to a looser view of the contract idea, urging that we include
within the moral community all those who have or will have
the capacity to take part in a reciprocal agreement, irrespective
of whether they are in fact able to reciprocate, and irrespective,
too, of when they will have this capacity. Plainly, this view is
no longer based on reciprocity at all, for (unless we care greatly
about having our grave kept tidy or our memory preserved for
ever) later generations plainly cannot enter into reciprocal relationships with us, even though they will one day have the
capacity to reciprocate. If contract theorists abandon reciprocity
in this manner, however, what is left of the contract account?
Why adopt it at all? And why limit morality to those who have
the capacity to enter into agreements with us, if in fact there is
no possibility of them ever doing so? Rather than cling to the
81 

husk of a contract view that has lost its kernel, it would be
better to abandon it altogether, and consider, on the basis of
universalisability, which beings ought to be included within
morality.
82 
4
WHAT'S WRONG WITH KILLING?
A
N oversimplified summary of the first three chapters of
this book might read like this: the first chapter sets up a
conception of ethics from which, in the second chapter, the
principle of equal consideration of interests is derived; this principle is then used to illuminate problems about the equality
of humans and, in the third chapter, applied to non-human
animals.
Thus the principle of equal consideration of interests has been
behind much of our discussion so far; but as I suggested in the
previous chapter, the application of this principle when lives
are at stake is less clear than when we are concerned with
interests like avoiding pain and experiencing pleasure. In this
chapter we shall look at some views about the value of life, and
the wrongness of taking life, in order to prepare the ground for
the following chapters in which we shall turn to the practical
issues of killing animals, abortion, euthanasia, and environmental ethics.
HUMAN LIFE
People often say that life is sacred. They almost never mean
what they say. They do not mean, as their words seem to imply,
that life itself is sacred. If they did, killing a pig or pulling up a
cabbage would be as abhorrent to them as the murder of a ^ ,
human being. When people say that life is sacred, it is human ' ''*Ty
.life they have in mind. But why should human life have special J
value? jf j 'f h- ~ *f" <»i /<•*.->.. .„]
" 83 ,,.,,-j
l_iU .•/>*/£ !•> SL-WU'M '•> -jet »<>f /'V -hi''
, jf , tvmfr 

In discussing the doctrine of the sanctity of human life I shall
not take the term 'sanctity' in a specifically religious sense. The
doctrine may well have a religious origin, as I shall suggest later
in this chapter, but it is now part of a broadly secular ethic, and
it is as part of this secular ethic that it is most influential today.
Nor shall I take the doctrine as maintaining that it is always
wrong to take human life, for this would imply absolute pacifism, and there are many supporters of the sanctity of human
life who concede that we may kill in self-defence. We may take
the doctrine of the sanctity of human life to be no more than
a way of saying that human life has some special value, a value
quite distinct from the value of the lives of other living things.
The view that human life has unique value is deeply rooted
in our society and is enshrined in our law. To see how far it
can be taken, I recommend a remarkable book: The Long Dying
of Baby Andrew, by Robert and Peggy Stinson. In December 1976
Peggy Stinson, a Pennsylvania schoolteacher, was twenty-four
weeks pregnant when she went into premature labor. The baby,
whom Robert and Peggy named Andrew, was marginally viable.
Despite a firm statement from both parents that they wanted
'no heroics', the doctors in charge of their child used all the
technology of modern medicine to keep him alive for nearly six
months. Andrew had periodic fits. Towards the end of that
period, it was clear that if he survived at all, he would be seriously and permanently impaired. Andrew was also suffering
considerably: at one point his doctor told the Stinsons that it
must 'hurt like hell' every time Andrew drew a breath. Andrew's
treatment cost $104,000, at 1977 cost levels - today it could
easily be three times that, for intensive care for extremely premature babies costs at least $1,500 per day.
Andrew Stinson was kept alive, against the wishes of his
parents, at a substantial financial cost, notwithstanding evident
suffering, and despite the fact that, after a certain point it was
clear that he would never be able to live an independent life,
or to think and talk in the way that most humans do. Whether
84 
?
such treatment of an infant human being is or is not the right
thing to do - and I come back to this question in Chapter 7 -
it makes a striking contrast with the casual way in which we
take the lives of stray dogs, experimental monkeys, and beef
cattle. What justifies the difference?
In every society known to us there has been some prohibition
on the taking of life. Presumably no society can survive if it
allows its members to kill one another without restriction. Precisely who is protected, however, is a matter on which societies
have differed. In many tribal societies the only serious offence
is to kill an innocent member of the tribe itself - members of
other tribes may be killed with impunity. In more sophisticated
nation-states protection has generally extended to all within the
nation's territorial boundaries, although there have been cases
- like slave-owning states - in which a minority was excluded.
Nowadays most agree, in theory if not in practice, that, apart
from special cases like self-defence, war, possibly capital punishment, and one or two other doubtful areas, it is wrong to
kill human beings irrespective of their race, religion, class, or
nationality. The moral inadequacy of narrower principles, limiting the respect for life to a tribe, race, or nation, is taken for
granted; but the argument of the preceding chapter must raise
doubts about whether the boundary of our species marks a more
defensible limit to the protected circle.
At this point we should pause to ask what we mean by terms
- like 'human life' or 'human being'. These terms figure prominently in debates about, for example, abortion. 'Is the fetus a
human being?' is often taken as the crucial question in the
abortion debate; but unless we think carefully about these terms
such questions cannot be answered.
It is possible to give 'human being' a precise meaning. We
can use it as equivalent to 'member of the species Homo sapiens'.
Whether a being is a member of a given species is something
that can be determined scientifically, by an examination of the
nature of the chromosomes in the cells of living organisms. In
85 

this sense there is no doubt that from the first moments of its
existence an embryo conceived from human sperm and eggs is
a human being; and the same is true of the most profoundly
and irreparably intellectually disabled human being, even of an
infant who is bom anencephalic - literally, without a brain.
There is another use of the term 'human', one proposed by
Joseph Fletcher, a Protestant theologian and a prolific writer on
ethical issues. Fletcher has compiled a list of what he calls 'indicators of humanhood' that includes the following: selfawareness, self-control, a sense of the future, a sense of the past,
the capacity to relate to others, concern for others, communication, and curiosity. This is the sense of the term that we have
in mind when we praise someone by saying that she is 'a real
human being' or shows 'truly human qualities'. In saying this
we are not, of course, referring to the person's membership in
the species Homo sapiens which as a matter of biological fact
is rarely in doubt; we are implying that human beings characteristically possess certain qualities, and this person possesses
them to a high degree.
These two senses of 'human being' overlap but do not coincide. The embryo, the later fetus, the profoundly intellectually
disabled child, even the newborn infant - all are indisputably
members of the species Homo sapiens, but none are self-aware,
have a sense of the future, or the capacity to relate to others.
Hence the choice between the two senses can make an important difference to how we answer questions like 'Is the fetus a
human being?'
When choosing which words to use in a situation like this
we should choose terms that will enable us to express our meaning clearly, and that do not prejudge the answer to substantive
questions. To stipulate that we shall use 'human' in, say, the
first of the two senses just described, and that therefore the fetus
is a human being and abortion is immoral would not do. Nor
would it be any better to choose the second sense and argue
86 
?
on this basis that abortion is acceptable. The morality of abortion
is a substantive issue, the answer to which cannot depend on
a stipulation about how we shall use words. In order to avoid
begging any questions, and to make my meaning clear, I shall
for the moment put aside the tricky term 'human' and substitute
two different terms, corresponding to the two different senses
of 'human'. For the first sense, the biological sense, I shall simply
use the cumbersome but precise expression 'member of the
species Homo sapiens' while for the second sense I shall use the
term 'person'.
This use of 'person' is itself, unfortunately, liable to mislead,
since 'person' is often used as if it meant the same as 'human
being'. Yet the terms are not equivalent; there could be a person
w ho is not a member of our species. There could also be members of our species who are not persons. The word 'person' has
its origin in the Latin term for a mask worn by an actor in
classical drama. By putting on masks the actors signified that
they were acting a role. Subsequently 'person' came to mean
one who plays a role in life, one who is an agent. According to
the Oxford Dictionary, one of the current meanings of the term
is 'a self-conscious or rational being'. This sense has impeccable
philosophical precedents. John Locke defines a person as 'A
thinking intelligent being that has reason and reflection and can
consider itself as itself, the same thinking thing, in different times
and places.'
This definition makes 'person' close to what Fletcher meant
by 'human', except that it selects two crucial characteristics -
rationality and self-consciousness - as the core of the concept.
Quite possibly Fletcher would agree that these two are central,
and the others more or less follow from them. In any case, I
propose to use 'person', in the sense of a rational and selfconscious being, to capture those elements of the popular sense
of 'human being' that are not covered by 'member of the species
Homo sapiens'.
87 

The Value of the Life of Members of the Species
Homo Sapiens
With the clarification gained by our terminological interlude,
and the argument of the preceding chapter to draw upon, this
section can be very brief. The wrongness of inflicting pain on a
being cannot depend on the being's species: nor can the wrongness of killing it. The biological facts upon which the boundary
of our species is drawn do not have moral significance. To give
preference to the life of a being simply because that being is a
member of our species would put us in the same position as
racists who give preference to those who are members of their
race.
To those who have read the preceding chapters of this book,
this conclusion may seem obvious, for we have worked towards
it gradually; but it differs strikingly from the prevailing attitude
in our society, which as we have seen treats as sacred the lives
of all members of our species. How is it that our society should
have come to accept a view that bears up so poorly under critical
scrutiny? A short historical digression may help to explain.
If we go back to the origins of Western civilisation, to Greek
or Roman times, we find that membership of Homo sapiens
was not sufficient to guarantee that one's life would be protected. There was no respect for the lives of slaves or other
'barbarians'; and even among the Greeks and Romans themselves, infants had no automatic right to life. Greeks and Romans
killed deformed or weak infants by exposing them to the elements on a hilltop. Plato and Aristotle thought that the state
should enforce the killing of deformed infants. The celebrated
legislative codes said to have been drawn up by Lycurgus and
Solon contained similar provisions. In this period it was thought
better to end a life that had begun inauspiciously than to attempt
to prolong that life, with all the problems it might bring.
Our present attitudes date from the coming of Christianity.
There was a specific theological motivation for the Christian
88 
?
insistence on the importance of species membership: the belief
that all born of human parents are immortal and destined for
an eternity of bliss or for everlasting torment. With this belief,
the killing of Homo sapiens took on a fearful significance, since
it consigned a being to his or her eternal fate. A second Christian
doctrine that led to the same conclusion was the belief that since
we are created by God we are his property, and to kill a human
being is to usurp God's right to decide when we shall live and
when we shall die. As Thomas Aquinas put it, taking a human
life is a sin against God in the same way that killing a slave
would be a sin against the master to whom the slave belonged.
Non-human animals, on the other hand, were believed to have
been placed by God under man's dominion, as recorded in the
Bible (Genesis 1:29 and 9:1-3). Hence humans could kill nonhuman animals as they pleased, as long as the animals were
not the property of another.
During the centuries of Christian domination of European
thought the ethical attitudes based on these doctrines became
part of the unquestioned moral orthodoxy of European civilisation. Today the doctrines are no longer generally accepted,
but the ethical attitudes to which they gave rise fit in with the
deep-seated Western belief in the uniqueness and special privileges of our species, and have survived. Now that we are reassessing our speciesist view of nature, however, it is also time to
reassess our belief in the sanctity of the lives of members of our
species.
The Value of a Person's Life
We have broken down the doctrine of the sanctity of human
life into two separate claims, one that there is special value in
the life of a member of our species, and the other that there is
special value in the life of a person. We have seen that the
former claim cannot be defended. What of the latter? Is there
89 

special value in the life of a rational and self-conscious being,
as distinct from a being that is merely sentient?
One line of argument for answering this question affirmatively
runs as follows. A self-conscious being is aware of itself as a
distinct entity, with a past and a future. (This, remember, was
Locke's criterion for being a person.) A being aware of itself in
this way will be capable of having desires about its own future. ^
For example, a professor of philosophy may hope to write a
book demonstrating the objective nature of ethics; a student
may look forward to graduating; a child may want to go for a |
ride in an aeroplane. To take the lives of any of these people,
without their consent, is to thwart their desires for the future.
Killing a snail or a day-old infant does not thwart any desires
of this kind, because snails and newborn infants are incapable
of having such desires.
It may be said that when a person is killed we are not left
with a thwarted desire in the same sense in which I have a
thwarted desire when I am hiking through dry country and,
pausing to ease my thirst, discover a hole in my waterbottle. In
this case I have a desire that I cannot fulfil, and I feel frustration
and discomfort because of the continuing and unsatisfied desire
for water. When I am killed the desires I have for the future do
not continue after my death, and I do not suffer from their nonfulfilment. But does this mean that preventing the fulfilment of
these desires does not matter?
Classical utilitarianism, as expounded by the founding father
of utilitarianism, Jeremy Bentham, and refined by later philosophers like John Stuart Mill and Henry Sidgwick, judges actions
by their tendency to maximise pleasure or happiness and minimise pain or unhappiness. Terms like 'pleasure' and 'happiness'
lack precision, but it is clear that they refer to something that
is experienced, or felt - in other words, to states of consciousness. According to classical utilitarianism, therefore, there is no
direct significance in the fact that desires for the future go un90
I 
?
fulfilled when people die. If you die instantaneously, whether
you have any desires for the future makes no difference to the
amount of pleasure or pain you experience. Thus for the classical
utilitarian the status of 'person' is not directly relevant to the
wrongness of killinjg.
Indirectly, however, being a person may be important for the
classical utilitarian. Its importance arises in the following manner. If I am a person, I have a conception of myself. I know
that I have a future. I also know that my future existence could
be cut short. If I think that this is likely to happen at any moment, my present existence will be fraught with anxiety, and
will presumably be less enjoyable than if I do not think it is
likely to happen for some time. If I learn that people like myself
are very rarely killed, I will worry less. Hence the classical utilitarian can defend a prohibition on killing persons on the indirect
ground that it will increase the happiness of people who would
otherwise worry that they might be killed. I call this an indirect
ground because it does not refer to any direct wrong done to
the person killed, but rather to a consequence of it for other
people. There is, of course, something odd about objecting to
murder, not because of the wrong done to the victim, but because of the effect that the murder will have on others. One
has to be a tough-minded classical utilitarian to be untroubled
by this oddness. (Remember, though, that we are now only
considering what is especially wrong about killing a person. The
classical utilitarian can still regard killing as wrong because it
eliminates the happiness that the victim would have experienced, had she lived. This objection to murder will apply to any
being likely to have a happy future, irrespective of whether the
being is a person.) For present purposes, however, the main
point is that this indirect ground does provide a reason for taking
the killing of a person, under certain conditions, more seriously
than the killing of a non-personal being. If a being is incapable
of conceiving of itself as existing over time, we need not take
91 
1

into account the possibility of it worrying about the prospect of
its future existence being cut short. It can't worry about this,
for it has no conception of its own future.
I said that the indirect classical utilitarian reason for taking
the killing of a person more seriously than the killing of a nonperson holds 'under certain conditions'. The most obvious of
these conditions is that the killing of the person may become
known to other persons, who derive from this knowledge a
more gloomy estimate of their own chances of living to a ripe
old age, or simply become fearful of being murdered. It is of
course possible that a person could be killed in complete secrecy,
so that no one else knew a murder had been committed. Then
this indirect reason against killing would not apply.
To this last point, however, a qualification must be made. In
the circumstances described in the last paragraph, the indirect
classical utilitarian reason against killing would not apply in so
far as we judge this individual case. There is something to be said,
however, against applying utilitarianism only or primarily at the
level of each individual case. It may be that in the long run, we
will achieve better results - greater overall happiness - if we
urge people not to judge each individual action by the standard
of utility, but instead to think along the lines of some broad
principles that will cover all or virtually all of the situations that
they are likely to encounter.
Several reasons have been offered in support of this approach.
R.M. Hare has suggested a useful distinction between two levels
of moral reasoning: the intuitive and the critical. To consider,
in theory, the possible circumstances in which one might maximise utility by secretly killing someone who wants to go on
living is to reason at the critical level. As philosophers, or just
as reflective, self-critical people, it can be interesting and helpful
to our understanding of ethical theory to think about such unusual hypothetical cases. Everyday moral thinking, however,
must be more intuitive. In real life we usually cannot foresee
all the complexities of our choices. It is simply not practical to
92 
?
try to calculate the consequences, in advance, of every choice
we make. Even if we were to limit ourselves to the more significant choices, there would be a danger that in many cases
we would be calculating in less than ideal circumstances. We
could be hurried, or flustered. We might be feeling angry, or
hurt, or competitive. Our thoughts could be coloured by greed,
or sexual desire, or thoughts of vengeance. Our own interests,
or the interests of those we love, might be at stake. Or we might
just not be very good at thinking about such complicated issues
as the likely consequences of a significant choice. For all these
reasons, Hare suggests, it will be better if, for our everyday
ethical life, we adopt some broad ethical principles and do not
deviate from them. These principles should include those that
experience has shown, over the centuries, to be generally conducive to producing the best consequences: and in Hare's view
that would include many of the standard moral principles, for
example, telling the truth, keeping promises, not harming others, and so on. Respecting the lives of people who want to go
on living would presumably be among these principles. Even
though, at the critical level, we can conceive of circumstances
in which better consequences would flow from acting against
one or more of these principles, people will do better on the
whole if they stick to the principles than if they do not.
On this view, soundly chosen intuitive moral principles
should be like a good tennis coach's instructions to a player.
The instructions are given with an eye to what will pay off most
of the time; they are a guide to playing "percentage tennis".
Occasionally an individual player might go for a freak shot, and
pull off a winner that has everyone applauding; but if the coach
is any good at all, deviations from the instructions laid down
will, more often than not, lose. So it is better to put the thought
of going for those freak shots out of one's mind. Similarly, if
we are guided by a set of well-chosen intuitive principles, we
may do better if we do not attempt to calculate the consequences
of each significant moral choice we must make, but instead
93 

consider what principles apply to it, and act accordingly. Perhaps
very occasionally we will find ourselves in circumstances in
which it is absolutely plain that departing from the principles
will produce a much better result than we will obtain by sticking
to them, and then we may be justified in making the departure.
But for most of us, most of the time, such circumstances will
not arise and can be excluded from our thinking. Therefore even
though at the critical level the classical utilitarian must concede
the possibility of cases in which it would be better not to respect
a person's desire to continue living, because the person could
be killed in complete secrecy, and a great deal of unalleviated
misery could thereby be prevented, this kind of thinking has
no place at the intuitive level that should guide our everyday
actions. So, at least, a classical utilitarian can argue.
That is, I think, the gist of what the classical utilitarian would
say about the distinction between killing a person and killing
some other type of being. There is, however, another version
of utilitarianism that gives greater weight to the distinction. This
other version of utilitarianism judges actions, not by their tendency to maximise pleasure or minimise pain, but by the extent
to which they accord with the preferences of any beings affected
by the action or its consequences. This version of utilitarianism
is known as 'preference utilitarianism'. It is preference utilitarianism, rather than classical utilitarianism, that we reach by
universalising our own interests in the manner described in the
opening chapter of this book - if, that is, we make the plausible
move of taking a person's interests to be what, on balance and
after reflection on all the relevant facts, a person prefers.
According to preference utilitarianism, an action contrary to
the preference of any being is, unless this preference is outweighed by contrary preferences, wrong. Killing a person who
prefers to continue living is therefore wrong, other things being
equal. That the victims are not around after the act to lament
the fact that their preferences have been disregarded is irrelevant. The wrong is done when the preference is thwarted.
94 
?
For preference utilitarians, taking the life of a person will
normally be worse than taking the life of some other being,
since persons are highly future-oriented in their preferences. To
kill a person is therefore, normally, to violate not just one, but
a wide range of the most central and significant preferences a
being can have. Very often, it will make nonsense of everything
that the victim has been trying to do in the past days, months,
or even years,, In contrast, beings who cannot see themselves
as entities with a future cannot have any preferences about their
o wn future existence. This is not to deny that such beings might
struggle against a situation in which their lives are in danger,
as a fish struggles to get free of the barbed hook in its mouth;
but this indicates no more than a preference for the cessation
of a state of affairs that is perceived as painful or frightening.
Struggle against danger and pain does not suggest that fish
are capable of preferring their own future existence to nonexistence. The behaviour of a fish on a hook suggests a reason
for not killing fish by that method, but does not in itself suggest
a preference utilitarian reason against killing fish by a method
that brings about death instantly, without first causing pain or
distress. (Again, remember that we are here considering what
is especially wrong about killing a person; I am not saying that
there are never any preference utilitarian reasons against killing
conscious beings who are not persons.)
Does a Person Have a Right to Life?
Although preference utilitarianism does provide a direct reason
for not killing a person, some may find the reason - even when
coupled with the important indirect reasons that any form of
utilitarianism will take into account - not sufficiently stringent.
Even for preference utilitarianism, the wrong done to the person
killed is merely one factor to be taken into account, and the
preference of the victim could sometimes be outweighed by the
preferences of others. Some say that the prohibition on killing
95 

people is more absolute than this kind of utilitarian calculation
implies. Our lives, we feel, are things to which we have a right,
and rights are not to be traded off against the preferences or
pleasures of others.
I am not convinced that the notion of a moral right is a helpful
or meaningful one, except when it is used as a shorthand way
of referring to more fundamental moral considerations. Nevertheless, since the idea that we have a 'right to life' is a popular
one, it is worth asking whether there are grounds for attributing
rights to life to persons, as distinct from other living beings.
Michael Tooley, a contemporary American philosopher, has
argued that the only beings who have a right to life are those
who can conceive of themselves as distinct entities existing over
time - in other words, persons, as we have used the term. His
argument is based on the claim that there is a conceptual connection between the desires a being is capable of having and
the rights that the being can be said to have. As Tooley puts it:
The basic intuition is that a right is something that can be violated
and that, in general, to violate an individual's right to something
is to frustrate the corresponding desire. Suppose, for example,
that you own a car. Then I am under a prima facie obligation
not to take it from you. However, the obligation is not unconditional: it depends in part upon the existence of a corresponding
desire in you. If you do not care whether I take your car, then
I generally do not violate your right by doing so.
Tooley admits that it is difficult to formulate the connections
between rights and desires precisely, because there are problem
cases like people who are asleep or temporarily unconscious.
He does not want to say that such people have no rights because
they have, at that moment, no desires. Nevertheless, Tooley
holds, the possession of a right must in some way be linked
with the capacity to have the relevant desires, if not with having
the actual desires themselves.
The next step is to apply this view about rights to the case of
the right to life. To put the matter as simply as possible - more
96 
?
simply than Tooley himself does and no doubt too simply - if
the right to life is the right to continue existing as a distinct
entity, then the desire relevant to possessing a right to life is the
desire to continue existing as a distinct entity. But only a being
who is capable of conceiving herself as a distinct entity existing
over time - that is, only a person - could have this desire.
Therefore only a person could have a right to life.
This is how Tooley first formulated his position, in a striking
article entitled "Abortion and Infanticide", first published in
1972. The problem of how precisely to formulate the connections between rights and desires, however, led Tooley to alter
his position in a subsequent book with the same title, Abortion
and Infanticide. He there argues that an individual cannot at a
given time - say, now - have a right to continued existence
unless the individual is of a kind such that it can now be in its
interests that it continue to exist. One might think that this
makes a dramatic difference to the outcome of Tooley's position,
for while a newborn infant would not seem to be capable of
conceiving itself as a distinct entity existing over time, we commonly think that it can be in the interests of an infant to be
saved from death, even if the death would have been entirely
without pain or suffering. We certainly do this in retrospect: I
might say, if I know that I nearly died in infancy, that the person
who snatched my pram from the path of the speeding train is
my greatest benefactor, for without her swift thinking I would
never have had the happy and fulfilling life that I am now living.
Tooley argues, however, that the retrospective attribution of an
interest in living to the infant is a mistake. I am not the infant
from whom I developed. The infant could not look forward to
developing into the kind of being I am, or even into any intermediate being, between the being I now am and the infant. I
cannot even recall being the infant; there are no mental links
between us. Continued existence cannot be in the interests of
a being who never has had the concept of a continuing self -
that is, never has been able to conceive of itself as existing over
97 

time. If the train had instantly killed the infant, the death would
not have been contrary to the interests of the infant, because
the infant would never have had the concept of existing over
time. It is true that I would then not be alive, but I can say that
it is in my interests to be alive only because I do have the concept
of a continuing self. I can with equal truth say that it is in my
interests that my parents met, because if they had never met,
they could not have created the embryo from which I developed,
and so I would not be alive. This does not mean that the creation
of this embryo was in the interests of any potential being who
was lurking around, waiting to be brought into existence. There
was no such being, and had I not been brought into existence,
there would not have been anyone who missed out on the life
I have enjoyed living. Similarly, we make a mistake if we now
construct an interest in future life in the infant, who in the first
days following birth can have no concept of continued existence,
and with whom I have no mental links.
Hence in his book Tooley reaches, though by a more circuitous route, a conclusion that is practically equivalent to the
conclusion he reached in his article. To have a right to life, one
must have, or at least at one time have had, the concept of
having a continued existence. Note that this formulation avoids
any problems in dealing with sleeping or unconscious people;
it is enough that they have had, at one time, the concept of
continued existence for us to be able to say that continued life
may be in their interests. This makes sense: my desire to continue living - or to complete the book I am writing, or to travel
around the world next year - does not cease whenever I am
not consciously thinking about these things. We often desire
things without the desire being at the forefront of our minds.
The fact that we have the desire is apparent if we are reminded
of it, or suddenly confronted with a situation in which we must
choose between two courses of action, one of which makes the
fulfilment of the desire less likely. In a similar way, when we
go to sleep our desires for the future have not ceased to exist.
98 
?
They will still be there, when we wake. As the desires are still
part of us, so, too, our interest in continued life remains part
of us while we are asleep or unconscious.
People and Respect for Autonomy
To this point our discussion of the wrongness of killing people
has focused on their capacity to envisage their future and have
desires related to it. Another implication of being a person may
also be relevant to the wrongness of killing. There is a strand
of ethical thought, associated with Kant but including many
modern writers who are not Kantians, according to which respect for autonomy is a basic moral principle. By 'autonomy'
is meant the capacity to choose, to make and act on one's own
decisions. Rational and self-conscious beings presumably have
this ability, whereas beings who cannot consider the alternatives
open to them are not capable of choosing in the required sense
and hence cannot be autonomous. In particular, only a being
who can grasp the difference between dying and continuing to
live can autonomously choose to live. Hence killing a person
who does not choose to die fails to respect that person's autonomy; and as the choice of living or dying is about the most
fundamental choice anyone can make, the choice on which all
other choices depend, killing a person who does not choose to
die is the gravest possible violation of that person's autonomy.
Not everyone agrees that respect for autonomy is a basic moral
principle, or a valid moral principle at all. Utilitarians do not
respect autonomy for its own sake, although they might give
great weight to a person's desire to go on living, either in a
preference utilitarian way, or as evidence that the person's life
was on the whole a happy one. But if we are preference utilitarians we must allow that a desire to go on living can be
outweighed by other desires, and if we are classical utilitarians
we must recognise that people may be utterly mistaken in their
expectations of happiness. So a utilitarian, in objecting to the
99 

killing of a person, cannot place the same stress on autonomy
as those who take respect for autonomy as an independent
moral principle. The classical utilitarian might have to accept
that in some cases it would be right to kill a person who does
not choose to die on the grounds that the person will otherwise
lead a miserable life. This is true, however, only on the critical
level of moral reasoning. As we saw earlier, utilitarians may
encourage people to adopt, in their daily lives, principles that
will in almost all cases lead to better consequences when followed than any alternative action. The principle of respect for
autonomy would be a prime example of such a principle. We
shall discuss actual cases that raise this issue shortly, in the
discussion of euthanasia in Chapter 7. ^
It may be helpful here to draw together our conclusions about
the value of a person's life. We have seen that there are four
possible reasons for holding that a person's life has some distinctive value over and above the life of a merely sentient being:
the classical utilitarian concern with the effects of the killing on
others; the preference utilitarian concern with the frustration
of the victim's desires and plans for the future; the argument
that the capacity to conceive of oneself as existing over time is
a necessary condition of a right to life; and respect for autonomy.
Although at the level of critical reasoning a classical utilitarian
would accept only the first, indirect, reason, and a preference
utilitarian only the first two reasons, at the intuitive level utilitarians of both kinds would probably advocate respect for autonomy too. The distinction between critical and intuitive levels
thus leads to a greater degree of convergence, at the level of
everyday moral decision making, between utilitarians and those
who hold other moral views than we would find if we took
into account only the critical level of reasoning. In any case,
none of the four reasons for giving special protection to the lives
of persons can be rejected out of hand. We shall therefore bear
all four in mind when we turn to practical issues involving
killing.
100 
?
Before we do turn to practical questions about killing, however, we have still to consider claims about the value of life that
are based neither on membership of our species, nor on being
a person.
CONSCIOUS LIFE
There are many beings who are sentient and capable of experiencing pleasure and pain, but are not rational and selfconscious and so not persons. I shall refer to these beings as
conscious being. Many non-human animals almost certainly
fall into this category; so must newborn infants and some
intellectually disabled humans. Exactly which of these lack
self-consciousness is something we shall consider in the next
chapters. If Tooley is right, those beings who do lack selfconsciousness cannot be said to have a right to life, in the full
sense of 'right'. Still, for other reasons, it might be wrong to kill
them. In the present section we shall ask if the life of a being
w ho is conscious but not self-conscious has value, and if so,
how the value of such a life compares with the value of a
person's life.
Should We Value Conscious Life?
The most obvious reason for valuing the life of a being capable
of experiencing pleasure or pain is the pleasure it can experience. If we value our own pleasures - like the pleasures of
eating, of sex, of running at full speed and of swimming on a
hot day - then the universal aspect of ethical judgments requires
us to extend our positive evaluation of our own experience of
these pleasures to the similar experiences of all who can experience them. But death is the end of all pleasurable experiences. Thus the fact that beings will experience pleasure in the
future is a reason for saying that it would be wrong to kill them.
Of course, a similar argument about pain points in the opposite
101 

direction, and it is only when we believe that the pleasure that
beings are likely to experience outweighs the pain they are likely
to suffer, that this argument counts against killing. So what this
amounts to is that we should not cutshort a plgasact life.
This seems simple enough: we value pleasure, killing those
who lead pleasant lives eliminates the pleasure they would
otherwise experience, therefore such killing is wrong. But stating the argument in this way conceals something that, once
noticed, makes the issue anything but simple. There are two
ways of reducing the amount of pleasure in the world: one is
to eliminate pleasures from the lives of those leading pleasant
lives; the other is to eliminate those leading pleasant lives. The
former leaves behind beings who experience less pleasure than
they otherwise would have. The latter does not. This means
that we cannot move automatically from a preference for a
pleasant life rather than an unpleasant one, to a preference for
a pleasant life rather than no life at all. For, it might be objected,
being killed does not make us worse off; it makes us cease to
exist. Once we have ceased to exist, we shall not miss the pleasure we would have experienced.
Perhaps this seems sophistical - an instance of the ability of
academic philosophers to find distinctions where there are no
significant differences. If that is what you think, consider the
opposite case: a case not of reducing pleasure, but of increasing
it. There are two ways of increasing the amount of pleasure in
the world: one is to increase the pleasure of those who now
exist; the other is to increase the number of those who will lead
pleasant lives. If killing those leading pleasant lives is bad because of the loss of pleasure, then it would seem to be good to
increase the number of those leading pleasant lives. We could
do this by having more children, provided we could reasonably
expect their lives to be pleasant, or by rearing large numbers of
animals under conditions that would ensure that their lives
would be pleasant. But would it really be good to create more
pleasure by creating more pleased beings?
102 
?
There seem to be two possible approaches to these perplexing
issues. The first approach is simply to accept that it is good to
increase the amount of pleasure in the world by increasing the
number of pleasant lives, and bad to reduce the amount of
pleasure in the world by reducing the number of pleasant lives.
This approach has the advantage of being straightforward and
clearly consistent, but it requires us to hold that if we could
increase the number of beings leading pleasant lives without
making others worse off, it would be good to do so. To see
whether you are troubled by this conclusion, it may be helpful
to consider a specific case. Imagine that a couple are trying to
decide whether to have children. Suppose that as far as their
own happiness is concerned, the advantages and disadvantages
balance out. Children will interfere with their careers at a crucial
stage of their professional lives, and they will have to give up
their favourite recreation, cross-country skiing, for a few years
at least. At the same time, they know that, like most parents,
they will get joy and fulfilment from having children and watching them develop. Suppose that if others will be affected, the
good and bad effects will cancel each other out. Finally, suppose
that since the couple could provide their children with a good
start in life, and the children would be citizens of a developed
nation with a high living standard, it is probable that their
children will lead pleasant lives. Should the couple count the
likely future pleasure of their children as a significant reason
for having children? I doubt that many couples would, but if
we accept this first approach, they should.
I shall call this approach the 'total' view since on this view
we aim to increase the total amount of pleasure (and reduce
the total amount of pain) and are indifferent whether this is
done by increasing the pleasure of existing beings, or increasing
the number of beings who exist.
The second approach is to count only beings who already
exist, prior to the decision we are taking, or at least will exist
independently of that decision. We can call this the 'prior ex103 

istence' view. It denies that there is value in increasing pleasure
by creating additional beings. The prior existence view is more
in harmony with the intuitive judgment most people have (I
think) that couples are under no moral obligation to have children when the children are likely to lead pleasant lives and no
one else is adversely affected. But how do we square the prior
existence view with our intuitions about the reverse case, when
a couple are considering having a child who, perhaps because
it will inherit a genetic defect, would lead a thoroughly miserable life and die before its second birthday? We would think
it wrong for a couple knowingly to conceive such a child; but
if the pleasure a possible child will experience is not a reason
for bringing it into the world, why is the pain a possible child
will experience a reason against bringing it into the world? The
prior existence view must either hold that there is nothing
wrong with bringing a miserable being into the world, or explain
the asymmetry between cases of possible children who are likely
to have pleasant lives, and possible children who are likely to
have miserable lives. Denying that it is bad knowingly to bring
a miserable child into the world is hardly likely to appeal to
those who adopted the prior existence view in the first place
because it seemed more in harmony with their intuitive judgments than the total view; but a convincing explanation of the
asymmetry is not easy to find. Perhaps the best one can say -
and it is not very good - is that there is nothing directly wrong
in conceiving a child who will be miserable, but once such a
child exists, since its life can contain nothing but misery, we
should reduce the amount of pain in the world by an act of
euthanasia. But euthanasia is a more harrowing process for the
parents and others involved than non-conception. Hence we
have an indirect reason for not conceiving a child bound to have
a miserable existence.
So is it wrong to cut short a pleasant life? We can hold that
it is, on either the total view or the prior existence view, but
our answers commit us to different things in each case. We can
104 
?
only take the prior existence approach if we accept that it is not
wrong to bring a miserable being into existence - or else offer
an explanation for why this should be wrong, and yet it not be
wrong to fail to bring into existence a being whose life will be
pleasant. Alternatively we can take the total approach, but then
we must accept that it is also good to create more beings whose
lives will be pleasant - and this has some odd practical implications. Some of these implications we have already seen. Others will become evident in the next chapter.
Comparing the Value of Different Lives
If we can give an affirmative - albeit somewhat shaky - answer
to the question whether the life of a being who is conscious but
not self-conscious has some value, can we also compare the
value of different lives, at different levels of consciousness or
self-consciousness? We are not, of course, going to attempt to
assign numerical values to the lives of different beings, or even
to produce an ordered list. The best that we could hope for is
some idea of the principles that, when supplemented with the
appropriate detailed information about the lives of different
beings, might serve as the basis for such a list. But the most
fundamental issue is whether we can accept the idea of ordering
the value of different lives at all.
Some say that it is anthropocentric, even speciesist, to order
the value of different lives in a hierarchical manner. If we do
so we shall, inevitably, be placing ourselves at the top and other
beings closer to us in proportion to the resemblance between
them and ourselves. Instead we should recognise that from the
points of view of the different beings themselves, each life is of
equal value. Those who take this view recognise, of course, that
a person's life may include the study of philosophy while a
mouse's life cannot; but they say that the pleasures of a mouse's
life are all that the mouse has, and so can be presumed to mean
as much to the mouse as the pleasures of a person's life mean
105 

to the person. We cannot say that the one is more or less valuable than the other.
Is it speciesist to judge that the life of a normal adult member
of our species is more valuable than the life of a normal adult
mouse? It would be possible to defend such a judgment only if
we can find some neutral ground, some impartial standpoint
from which we can make the comparison.
The difficulty of finding neutral ground is a very real practical
difficulty, but I am not convinced that it presents an insoluble
theoretical problem. I would frame the question we need to ask
in the following manner. Imagine that I have the peculiar property of being able to turn myself into an animal, so that like
Puck in A Midsummer-Night's Dream, 'Sometimes a horse I'll be,
sometimes a hound.' And suppose that when I am a horse, I
really am a horse, with all and only the mental experiences of
a horse, and when I am a human being I have all and only the
mental experiences of a human being. Now let us make the
additional supposition that I can enter a third state in which I
remember exactly what it was like to be a horse and exactly
what it was like to be a human being. What would this third
state be like? In some respects - the degree of self-awareness
and rationality involved, for instance - it might be more like a
human existence than an equine one, but it would not be a
human existence in every respect. In this third state, then, I
could compare horse-existence with human-existence. Suppose
that I were offered the opportunity of another life, and given
the choice of life as a horse or as a human being, the lives in
question being in each case about as good as horse or human
lives can reasonably be expected to be on this planet. I would
then be deciding, in effect, between the value of the life of a
horse (to the horse) and the value of the life of a human (to
the human).
Undoubtedly this scenario requires us to suppose a lot of
things that could never happen, and some things that strain our
imagination. The coherence of an existence in which one is
106 
?
neither a horse nor a human, but remembers what it was like
to be both, might be questioned. Nevertheless I think I can make
some sense of the idea of choosing from this position; and I am
fairly confident that from this position, some forms of life would
be seen as preferable to others.
If it is true that we can make sense of the choice between
existence as a mouse and existence as a human, then - whichever way the choice would go - we can make sense of the idea
that the life of one kind of animal possesses greater value than
the life of another; and if this is so, then the claim that the life
of every being has equal value is on very weak ground. We
cannot defend this claim by saying that every being's life is allimportant for it, since we have now accepted a comparison that
takes a more objective - or at least intersubjective - stance and
thus goes beyond the value of the life of a being considered
solely from the point of view of that being.
So it would not necessarily be speciesist to rank the value of
different lives in some hierarchical ordering. How we should go
about doing this is another question, and I have nothing better
to offer than the imaginative reconstruction of what it would
be like to be a different kind of being. Some comparisons may
be too difficult. We may have to say that we have not the
slightest idea whether it would be better to be a fish or a snake;
but then, we do not very often find ourselves forced to choose
between killing a fish or a snake. Other comparisons might not
be so difficult. In general it does seem that the more highly
developed the conscious life of the being, the greater the degree
of self-awareness and rationality and the broader the range of
possible experiences, the more one would prefer that kind of
life, if one were choosing between it and a being at a lower
level of awareness. Can utilitarians defend such a preference?
In a famous passage John Stuart Mill attempted to do so:
Few human creatures would consent to be changed into any of
the lower animals, for a promise of the fullest allowance of a
beast's pleasures; no intelligent human being would consent to
107 

be a fool, no instructed person would be an ignoramus, no person
of feeling and conscience would be selfish and base, even though
they should be persuaded that the fool, the dunce, or the rascal
is better satisfied with his lot than they are with theirs... It is
better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better
to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. And if the fool,
or the pig, are of a different opinion, it is because they only know
their own side of the question. The other party to the comparison
knows both sides.
As many critics have pointed out, this argument is weak. Does
Socrates really know what it is like to be a fool? Can he truly
experience the joys of idle pleasure in simple things, untroubled
by the desire to understand and improve the world? We may
doubt it. But another significant aspect of this passage is less
often noticed. Mill's argument for preferring the life of a human
being to that of an animal (with which most modern readers
would be quite comfortable) is exactly paralleled by his argument for preferring the life of an intelligent human being to that
of fool. Given the context and the way in which the term "fool"
was commonly used in his day, it seems likely that by this he
means what we would now refer to as a person with an intellectual disability. With this further conclusion some modern
readers will be distinctly uncomfortable; but as Mill's argument
suggests, it is not easy to embrace the preference for the life of
a human over that of a non-human, without at the same time
endorsing a preference for the life of a normal human being
over that of another human at a similar intellectual level to that
of the non-human in the first comparison.
Mill's argument is difficult to reconcile with classical utilitarianism, because it just does not seem true that the more intelligent being necessarily has a greater capacity for happiness; and
even if we were to accept that the capacity is greater, the fact
that, as Mill acknowledges, this capacity is less often filled (the
fool is satisfied, Socrates is not) would have to be taken into
consideration. Would a preference utilitarian have a better prospect of defending the judgments Mill makes? That would de108 
?
pend on how we compare different preferences, held with
differing degrees of awareness and self-consciousness. It does
not seem impossible that we should find ways of ranking such
different preferences, but at this stage the question remains
open.
This chapter has focussed on the killing of conscious beings.
Whether there is anything wrong about taking non-conscious
life - the lives of trees or plants, for instance - will be taken up
in Chapter 10, on environmental ethics.
109 
TAKING LIFE: ANIMALS
I
N Chapter 4 we examined some general principles about the
value of life. In this and the following two chapters we shall
draw from that discussion some conclusions about three cases
of killing that have been the subject of heated debate: abortion,
euthanasia, and killing animals. Of these three, the question of
killing animals has probably aroused the least controversy;
nevertheless, for reasons that will become clear later, it is impossible to defend a position on abortion and euthanasia without taking some view about the killing of non-human animals.
So we shall look at that question first.
CAN A NON-HUMAN ANIMAL BE A PERSON?
We have seen that there are reasons for holding that the killing
of a person is more seriously wrong than the killing of a being
who is not a person. This is true whether we accept preference
utilitarianism, Tooley's argument about the right to life, or the
principle of respect for autonomy. Even a classical utilitarian
would say that there may be indirect reasons why it is worse
to kill a person. So in discussing the wrongness of killing nonhuman animals it is important to ask if any of them are persons.
It sounds odd to call an animal a person. This oddness may
be no more than a symptom of our habit of keeping our own
species sharply separated from others. In any case, we can avoid
the linguistic oddness by rephrasing the question in accordance
with our definition of 'person'. What we are really asking
is whether any non-human animals are rational and self110 

conscious beings, aware of themselves as distinct entities with
a past and a future.
Are animals self-conscious? There is now solid evidence that
some are. Perhaps the most dramatic evidence comes from apes
who can communicate with us using a human language. The
ancient dream of teaching our language to another species was
realised when two American scientists, Allen and Beatrice Gardner, guessed that the failure of previous attempts to teach chimpanzees to talk was due to the chimpanzees' lacking, not the
intelligence required for using language, but the vocal equipment needed to reproduce the sounds of human language. The
Gardners therefore decided to treat a young chimpanzee as if
she were a human baby without vocal chords. They communicated with her, and with each other when in her presence,
by using American Sign Language, a language widely used by
deaf people.
The technique was a striking success. The chimpanzee, whom
they called 'Washoe', learned to understand about 350 different
signs, and to use about 150 of them correctly. She put signs
together to form simple sentences. As for self-consciousness,
Washoe does not hesitate, when shown her own image in a
mirror and asked 'Who is that?' to reply: 'Me, Washoe.' Later
Washoe moved to Ellensburg, Washington, where she lived
with other chimpanzees under the care of Roger and Deborah
Fouts. Here she adopted an infant chimpanzee and soon began
not only signing to him, but even deliberately teaching him
signs, for example, by moulding his hands into the sign for 'food'
in an appropriate context.
Gorillas appear to be as good as chimpanzees at learning sign
language. Almost twenty years ago Francine Patterson began
signing and also speaking English with Koko, a lowland gorilla.
Koko now has a working vocabulary of over 500 signs, and she
has used about 1000 signs correctly on one or more occasions.
She understands an even larger number of spoken English
words. Her companion Michael, who began to be exposed to
111 

signs at a later age, has used about 400 signs. In front of a
mirror, Koko will make faces, or examine her teeth. When
asked: 'What's a smart gorilla?' Koko responded: 'Me.' When
someone remarked of Koko, in her presence, 'She's a goofball!'
Koko (perhaps not understanding the term) signed: 'No, gorilla.'
An orangutan, Chantek, has been taught sign language by
Lyn Miles. When shown a photograph of a gorilla pointing to
h er nose, Chantek was able to imitate the gorilla by pointing
to his own nose. This implies that he has an image of his own
body and can transfer that image from the two-dimensional
plane of the visual image to perform the necessary bodily action.
Apes also use signs to refer to past or future events, thus
showing a sense of time. Koko, for example, when asked, six
days after the event, what had happened on her birthday, signed
'sleep eat'. Even more impressive is the evidence of temporal
sense shown by the regular festivities held by the Fouts for the
chimpanzees at Ellensburg. Each year, after Thanksgiving,
Roger and Deborah Fouts set up a Christmas tree, covered with
edible ornaments. The chimpanzees use the sign combination
'candy tree' to refer to the Christmas tree. In 1989, when snow
began to fall just after Thanksgiving but the tree had not yet
appeared, a chimpanzee named Tatu asked 'Candy tree?' The
Fouts interpret this as showing not only that Tatu remembered
the tree, but also that she knew that this was the season for it.
Later Tatu also remembered that the birthday of one of the
chimpanzees, Dar, followed closely on that of Deborah Fouts.
The chimpanzees got ice cream for their birthdays; and after
the festivities for Deborah's birthday were over, Tatu asked: 'Dar
ice cream?'
Suppose that on the basis of such evidence we accept that
the signing apes are self-conscious. Are they exceptional among
all the non-human animals in this respect, precisely because
they can use language? Or is it merely that language enables
these animals to demonstrate to us a characteristic that they,
and other animals, possessed all along?
112 

Some philosophers have argued that thinking requires language: one cannot think without formulating one's thoughts in
words. The Oxford philosopher Stuart Hampshire, for example,
has written:
The difference here between a human being and an animal lies
in the possibility of the human being expressing his intention
and putting into words his intention to do so-and-so, for his own
benefit or for the benefit of others. The difference is not merely
that an animal in fact has no means of communicating, or of
recording for itself, its intention, with the effect that no one can
ever know what the intention was. It is a stronger difference,
which is more correctly expressed as the senselessness of attributing intentions to an animal which has not the means to reflect
upon, and to announce to itself or to others, its own future
behaviour... It would be senseless to attribute to an animal a
memory that distinguished the order of events in the past, and
it would be senseless to attribute to it an expectation of an order
of events in the future. It does not have the concepts of order,
or any concepts at all.
Obviously Hampshire was wrong to distinguish so crudely between humans and animals; for as we have just seen, the signing
apes have clearly shown that they do have 'an expectation of
an order of events in the future.' But Hampshire wrote before
apes had learned to use sign language, so this lapse may be
excusable. The same cannot be said for the much later defence
of the same view by another English philosopher, Michael
Leahy, in a book entitled Against Liberation. Like Hampshire,
Leahy argues that animals, lacking language, cannot have intentions, or act 'for a reason.'
Suppose that such arguments were to be re-phrased so that
they referred to animals who have not learned to use a language,
rather than all animals. Would they then be correct? If so, no
being without language can be a person. This applies, presumably, to young humans as well as to non-signing animals. It
might be argued that many species of animals do use language,
just not our language. Certainly most social animals have some
113 

means of communicating with each other, whether it be the
melodious songs of the humpback whales, the buzzes and whistles of dolphins, the howls and barks of dogs, the songs of birds,
and even the dance performed by honey bees returning to the
hive, from which other bees learn the distance and direction of
the food source from which the bee has come. But whether any
of these amount to language, in the required sense, is doubtful;
and since it would take us too far from our topic to pursue that
issue, I shall assume that they do not, and consider what can
be learned from the non-linguistic behaviour of animals.
Is the line of argument that denies intentional behaviour to
animals sound when it is limited to animals without language?
I do not believe that it is. Hampshire's and Leahy's argument^
are typical of those of many philosophers who have written
along similar lines, in that they are attempts to do philosophy
from the armchair, on a topic that demands investigation in the
real world. There is nothing altogether inconceivable about a
being possessing the capacity for conceptual thought without
having a language and there are instances of animal behaviour
that are extraordinarily difficult, if not downright impossible,
to explain except under the assumption that the animals are
thinking conceptually. In one experiment, for example, German
researchers presented a chimpanzee named Julia with two series
of five closed and transparent containers. At the end of one
series was a box with a banana; the box at the end of the other
series was empty. The box containing the banana could only
be opened with a distinctively shaped key; this was apparent
from looking at the box. This key could be seen inside another
locked box; and to open that box, Julia needed another distinctive key, which had to be taken out of a third box which
could only be opened with its own key, which was inside a
fourth locked box. Finally, in front of Julia, were two initial
boxes, open and each containing a distinctive key. Julia was
able to choose the correct initial key, by which she could open
the next box in the series that led, eventually, to the box with
114 

the banana. To do this, she must have been able to reason
backwards from her desire to open the box with the banana to
her need to have the key that would open it, to her need for
the key that would open that box, and so on. Since Julia had
not been taught any form of language, her behaviour proves
that beings without language can think in quite complex ways.
Nor is it only in laboratory experiments that the behaviour
of animals points to the conclusion that they possess both memory of the past and expectations about the future, and that they
are self-aware, that they form intentions and act on them. Frans
de Waal and his colleagues have for several years watched chimpanzees living in semi-natural conditions in two acres of forest
at Amsterdam Zoo. They have often observed co-operating activity that requires planning. For example, the chimpanzees like
to climb the trees and break off branches, so that they can eat
the leaves. To prevent the rapid destruction of the small forest,
the zookeepers have placed electric fencing around the trunk
of the trees. The chimpanzees overcome this by breaking large
branches from dead trees (which have no fences around them)
and dragging them to the base of a live tree. One chimpanzee
then holds the dead branch while another climbs up it, over
the fence and into the tree. The chimpanzee who gets into the
tree in this way shares the leaves thus obtained with the one
holding the branch.
De Waal has also observed deliberately deceptive behaviour
that clearly shows both self-consciousness and an awareness of
the consciousness of another. Chimpanzees live in groups in
which one male will be dominant and will attack other males
who mate with receptive females. Despite this, a good deal of
sexual activity goes on when the dominant male is not watching.
Male chimpanzees often seek to interest females in sexual activity by sitting with their legs apart, displaying their erect penis.
(Human males who expose themselves in a similar way are
continuing a form of chimpanzee behaviour that has become
socially inappropriate.) On one occasion a junior male was en115 

ticing a female in this manner when the dominant male walked
over. The junior male covered his erection with his hands so
that the dominant male could not see it.
Jane Goodall has described an incident showing forward
planning by Figan, a young wild chimpanzee in the Gombe
region of Tanzania. In order to bring the animals closer to her
observation post, Goodall had hidden some bananas in a tree:
One day, sometime after the group had been fed, Figan spotted
a banana that had been overlooked - but Goliath [an adult male
ranking above Figan in the group's hierarchy] was resting directly
underneath it. After no more than a quick glance from the fruit
to Goliath, Figan moved away and sat on the other side of the
tent so that he could no longer see the fruit. Fifteen minutes
later, when Goliath got up and left, Figan without a moment's
hesitation went over and collected the banana. Quite obviously
he had sized up the whole situation: if he had climbed for the
fruit earlier, Goliath would almost certainly have snatched it
away. If he had remained close to the banana, he would probably
have looked at it from time to time. Chimps are very quick to
notice and interpret the eye movements of their fellows, and
Goliath would possibly, therefore, have seen the fruit himself.
And so Figan had not only refrained from instantly gratifying his
desire but had also gone away so that he could not 'give the
game away' by looking at the banana.
Goodall's description of this episode does, of course, attribute
to Figan a complex set of intentions, including the intention to
avoid 'giving the game away' and the intention to obtain the
banana after Goliath's departure. It also attributes to Figan an
'expectation of an order of events in the future', namely the
expectation that Goliath would move away, that the banana
would still be there, and that he, Figan, would then go and get
it. Yet there seems nothing at all 'senseless' about these attributions, despite the fact that Figan cannot put his intentions or
expectations into words. If an animal can devise a careful plan
for obtaining a banana, not now but at some future time, and
can take precautions against his own propensity to give away
116 

the object of the plan, that animal must be aware of himself as
a distinct entity, existing over time.
KILLING NON-HUMAN PERSONS
Some non-human animals are persons, as we have defined the
term. To judge the significance of this we must set it in the
context of our earlier discussion, in which I argued that the only
defensible version of the doctrine of the sanctity of human life
was what we might call the 'doctrine of the sanctity of personal
life'. I suggested that if human life does have special value or a
special claim to be protected, it has it in so far as most, human
beings are persons. But if some non-human animals are persons,
too, the lives of those animals must have the same special value
or claim to protection. Whether we base these special moral
features of the lives of human persons on preferential utilitarianism, on a right to life deriving from their capacity to see
themselves as continuing selves, or on respect for autonomy,
these arguments must apply to non-human persons as well.
Only the indirect utilitarian reason for not killing persons - the
fear that such acts are likely to arouse in other persons - applies
less readily to non-human persons since non-humans are less
likely than humans to learn about killings that take place at a
distance from them. But then, this reason does not apply to all
killings of human persons either, since it is possible to kill in
such a way that no one learns that a person has been killed.
Hence we should reject the doctrine that places the lives of
members of our species above the lives of members of other
species. Some members of other species are persons: some members of our own species are not. No objective assessment can
support the view that it is always worse to kill members of our
species who are not persons than members of other species who
are. On the contrary, as we have seen there are strong arguments
for thinking that to take the lives of persons is, in itself, more
serious than taking the lives of non-persons. So it seems that
117 

killing, say, a chimpanzee is worse than the killing of a human
being who, because of a congenital intellectual disability, is not
and never can be a person.
At present the killing of a chimpanzee is not regarded as a
serious matter. Large numbers of chimpanzees are used in scientific research, and many of them die in the course of this
research. For many years, because chimpanzees were difficult
to breed in captivity, the corporations that supplied these animals captured them in African jungles. The standard method
was to shoot a female with an infant by her side. The infant
was then captured and shipped to Europe and the United States.
Jane Goodall has estimated that for every infant who reached
his or her destination alive, six chimpanzees died. Although
chimpanzees have been placed on the threatened list, and this
trade has now been banned, illegal killing and trading of chimpanzees, and of gorillas and orangutans, still continues.
The great apes - chimpanzees, gorillas, and orangutans - may
be the clearest cases of non-human persons, but there are almost
certainly others. Systematic observation of whales and dolphins
has, for obvious reasons, lagged far behind that of apes, and it
is quite possible that these large-brained mammals will turn out
to be rational and self-conscious. Despite an official moratorium,
the whaling industry slaughters thousands of whales annually
in the name of 'research', and the whaling nations are seeking
to overturn the International Whaling Commission's moratorium so that they can return to full-scale commercial whaling.
Closer to home, many of those who live with dogs and cats are
convinced that these animals are self-conscious and have a sense
of the future. They begin to expect their companion human
being to come home at a certain time. In her book Emma and
I, Sheila Hocken relates how her guide-dog spontaneously began to take her, every Friday, to the places where she did her
weekend shopping, without needing to be told the day. People
who feed feral cats on a weekly basis have found that they, too,
will turn up on the right day of the week. Such observations
118 

may be 'unscientific', but to those who know dogs and cats well
they are plausible and in the absence of better studies they
should be taken seriously. According to official United States
Department of Agriculture figures, approximately 140,000 dogs
and 42,000 cats die in laboratories in the United States each
year, and smaller but still sizeable numbers are used in every
'developed' nation. And if dogs and cats qualify as persons, the
mammals we use for food cannot be far behind. We think of
dogs as being more like people than pigs; but pigs are highly
intelligent animals and if we kept pigs as pets and reared dogs
for food, we would probably reverse our order of preference.
Are we turning persons into bacon?
Admittedly, all this is speculative. It is notoriously difficult to
establish when another being is self-conscious. But if it is wrong
to kill a person when we can avoid doing so, and there is real
doubt about whether a being we are thinking of killing is a
person, we should give that being the benefit of the doubt. The
rule here is the same as that among deer hunters: if you see
something moving in the bushes and are not sure if it is a deer
or a hunter, don't shoot! (We may think the hunters shouldn't
shoot in either case, but the rule is a sound one within the
ethical framework hunters use.) On these grounds, a great deal
of the killing of non-human animals must be condemned.
KILLING OTHER ANIMALS
Arguments against killing based on the capacity to see oneself
as an individual existing over time apply to some non-human
animals, but there are others who, though presumably conscious, cannot plausibly be said to be persons. Of those animals
that humans regularly kill in large numbers, fish appear to be
the clearest case of animals who are conscious but not persons.
The rightness or wrongness of killing these animals seems to
rest on utilitarian considerations, for they are not autonomous
119 

and - at least if Tooley's analysis of rights is correct - do not
qualify for a right to life.
Before we discuss the utilitarian approach to killing itself, we
should remind ourselves that a wide variety of indirect reasons
will figure in the utilitarian's calculations. Many modes of killing
used on animals do not inflict an instantaneous death, so there
is pain in the process of dying. There is also the effect of the
death of one animal on his or her mate or other members of
the animal's social group. There are many species of birds in
which the bond between male and female lasts for a lifetime.
The death of one member of this pair presumably causes distress,
and a sense of loss and sorrow for the survivor. The motherchild relationship in mammals can be a source of intense suffering if either is killed or taken away. (Dairy farmers routinely
remove calves from their mothers at an early age, so that the
milk will be available for humans; anyone who has lived on a
dairy farm will know that, for days after the calves have gone,
the cows keep calling for them.) In some species the death of
one animal may be felt by a larger group - as the behaviour of
wolves and elephants suggests. All these factors would lead the
utilitarian to oppose a lot of killing of animals, whether or not
the animals are persons. These factors would not, however, be
reasons for opposing killing non-persons in itself, apart from
the pain and suffering it may cause.
The utilitarian verdict on killing that is painless and causes
no loss to others is more complicated, because it depends on
how we choose between the two versions of utilitarianism outlined in the previous chapter. If we take what I called the 'prior
existence' view, we shall hold that it is wrong to kill any being
whose life is likely to contain, or can be brought to contain,
more pleasure than pain. This view implies that it is normally
wrong to kill animals for food, since usually we could bring it
about that these animals had a few pleasant months or even
years before they died - and the pleasure we get from eating
them would not outweigh this.
120 

The other version of utilitarianism - the 'total' view - can
lead to a different outcome that has been used to justify meateating. The nineteenth-century British political philosopher Leslie Stephen once wrote:
'Of all the arguments for Vegetarianism none is so weak as
the argument from humanity. The pig has a stronger interest
than anyone in the demand for bacon. If all the world were
Jewish, there would be no pigs at all.'
Stephen views animals as if they were replaceable, and with
this those who accept the total view must agree. The total version of utilitarianism regards sentient beings as valuable only
in so far as they make possible the existence of intrinsically
valuable experiences like pleasure. It is as if sentient beings are
receptacles of something valuable and it does not matter if a
receptacle gets broken, so long as there is another receptacle to
which the contents can be transferred without any getting spilt.
(This metaphor should not be taken too seriously, however;
unlike precious liquids, experiences like pleasure cannot exist
independently from a conscious being, and so even on the total
view, sentient beings cannot properly be thought of merely as
receptacles.) Stephen's argument is that although meat-eaters
are responsible for the death of the animal they eat and for the
loss of pleasure experienced by that animal, they are also responsible for the creation of more animals, since if no one ate
meat there would be no more animals bred for fattening. The
loss meat-eaters inflict on one animal is thus balanced, on the
total view, by the benefit they confer on the next. We may call
this 'the replaceability argument'.
The first point to note about the replaceability argument is
that even if it is valid when the animals in question have a
pleasant life it would not justify eating the flesh of animals reared
in modern factory farms, where the animals are so crowded
together and restricted in their movements that their lives seem
to be more of a burden than a benefit to them.
A second point is that if it is good to create happy life, then
121 

presumably it is good for there to be as many happy beings on
our planet as it can possibly hold. Defenders of meat-eating had
better hope that they can find a reason why it is better for there
to be happy people rather than just the maximum possible number of happy beings, because otherwise the argument might
imply that we should eliminate almost all human beings in order
to make way for much larger numbers of smaller happy animals.
If, however, the defenders of meat-eating do come up with a
reason for preferring the creation of happy people to, say, happy
mice, then their argument will not support meat-eating at all.
For with the possible exception of arid areas suitable only for
pasture, the surface of our globe can support more people if we
grow plant foods than if we raise animals.
These two points greatly weaken the replaceability argument
as a defence of meat-eating, but they do not go to the heart of
the matter. Are some sentient beings really replaceable? The
response to the first edition of this book suggests that the replaceability argument is probably the most controversial, and
widely criticised, argument in this book. Unfortunately none of
the critics have offered satisfactory alternative solutions to the
underlying problems to which replaceability offers one - if not
very congenial — answer.
Henry Salt, a nineteenth-century English vegetarian and author of a book called Animals' Rights thought that the argument
rested on a simple philosophical error:
The fallacy lies in the confusion of thought that attempts to
compare existence with non-existence. A person who is already
in existence may feel that he would rather have lived than not,
but he must first have the terra firma of existence to argue from:
the moment he begins to argue as if from the abyss of the nonexistent, he talks nonsense, by predicating good or evil, happiness
or unhappiness, of that of which we can predicate nothing.
When I wrote the first edition of Animal Liberation I accepted
Salt's view. I thought that it was absurd to talk as if one conferred a favour on a being by bringing it into existence, since
122 

at the time one confers this favour, there is no being at all. But
now I am less confident. After all, as we saw in Chapter 4, we
do seem to do something bad if we knowingly bring a miserable
being into existence, and if this is so, it is difficult to explain
why we do not do something good when we knowingly bring
a happy being into existence.
Derek Parfit has described another hypothetical situation that
amounts to an even stronger case for the replaceability view.
He asks us to imagine that two women are each planning to
have a child. The first woman is already three months pregnant
when her doctor gives her both bad and good news. The bad
news is that the fetus she is carrying has a defect that will
significantly diminish the future child's quality of life - although
not so adversely as to make the child's life utterly miserable, or
not worth living at all. The good news is that this defect is easily
treatable. All the woman has to do is take a pill that will have
no side-effects, and the future child will not have the defect. In
this situation, Parfit plausibly suggests, we would all agree that
the woman should take the pill, and that she does wrong if she
refuses to take it.
The second woman sees her doctor before she is pregnant,
when she is about to stop using contraception, and also receives
bad and good news. The bad news is that she has a medical
condition that has the effect that if she conceives a child within
the next three months, that child will have a significant defect
- with exactly the same impact on the child's quality of life as
the defect described in the previous paragraph. This defect is
not treatable, but the good news is that the woman's condition
is a temporary one, and if she waits three months before becoming pregnant, her child will not have the defect. Here too,
Parfit suggests, we would all agree that the woman should wait
before becoming pregnant, and that she does wrong if she does
not wait.
Suppose that the first woman does not take the pill, and the
second woman does not wait before becoming pregnant, and
123 

that as a result each has a child with a significant disability. It
would seem that they have each done something wrong. Are
their wrong-doings of equal magnitude? If we assume that it
would have been no greater hardship for the second woman to
wait three months before becoming pregnant than it would have
been for the first woman to take the pill, it would seem that
the answer is yes, what each has done is equally wrong. But
now consider what this answer implies. The first woman has
harmed her child. That child can say to her mother: 'You should
have taken the pill. If you had done so, I would not now have
this disability, and my life would be significantly better.' But if
the child of the second woman tries to make the same claim,
her mother has a devastating response. She can say: 'If I had
waited three months before becoming pregnant you would
never have existed. I would have produced another child, from
a different egg and different sperm. Your life, even with your
disability, is definitely above the point at which life is so miserable that it ceases to be worth living. You never had a chance
of existing without the disability. So I have not harmed you at
all.' This reply seems a complete defence to the charge of having
harmed the child now in existence. If, despite this, we persist
in our belief that it was wrong of the woman not to postpone
her pregnancy, where does the wrongness lie? It cannot lie in
bringing into existence the child to whom she gave birth, for
that child has an adequate quality of life. Could it lie in not
bringing a possible being into existence - to be precise, in not
bringing into existence the child she would have had if she had
waited three months? This is one possible answer, but it commits us to the total view, and implies that, other things being
equal, it is good to bring into existence children without disabilities. A third possibility is that the wrong-doing lies, not in
harming an identifiable child, nor simply in omitting to bring
a possible child into existence, but in bringing into existence a
child with a less satisfactory quality of life than another child
whom one could have brought into existence. In other words,
124 

we have failed to bring about the best possible outcome. This
last seems the most plausible answer, but it too suggests that at
least possible people are replaceable. The question then becomes
this: At what stage in the process that passes from possible
people to actual people does replaceability cease to apply? What
characteristic makes the difference?
If we think of living creatures - human or non-human - as
self-conscious individuals, leading their own lives and wanting
to go on living, the replaceability argument holds little appeal.
It is possible that when Salt so emphatically rejected the idea
of replaceability, he was thinking of such beings, for he concludes the essay quoted above by claiming that Lucretius long
ago refuted Stephen's 'vulgar sophism' in the following passage
of De Rerum Natura:
What loss were ours, if we had known not birth?
Let living men to longer life aspire,
While fond affection binds their hearts to earth:
But who never hath tasted life's desire,
Unborn, impersonal, can feel no dearth.
This passage supports the claim that there is a difference between
killing living beings who 'to longer life aspire' and failing to
create a being who, unborn and impersonal, can feel no loss of
life. But what of beings who, though alive, cannot aspire to
longer life, because they lack the conception of themselves as
living beings with a future? These being are, in a sense, 'impersonal'. Perhaps, therefore, in killing them, one does them
no personal wrong, although one does reduce the quantity of
happiness in the universe. But this wrong, if it is wrong, can
be counter-balanced by bringing into existence similar beings
w ho will lead equally happy lives. So perhaps the capacity to
see oneself as existing over time, and thus to aspire to longer
life (as well as to have other non-momentary, future-directed
interests) is the characteristic that marks out those beings who
cannot be considered replaceable.
Although we shall return to this topic in the next two chap125 

ters, we can note here that this conclusion is in harmony with
Tooley's views about what it takes to have a right to life. For a
preference utilitarian, concerned with the satisfaction of preferences rather than experiences of suffering or happiness, there
is a similar fit with the distinction already drawn between killing
those who are rational and self-conscious beings, and those who
are not. Rational, self-conscious beings are individuals, leading
lives of their own and cannot in any sense be regarded merely
as receptacles for containing a certain quantity of happiness.
They have, in the words of the American philosopher James
Rachels, a life that is biographical, and not merely biological.
In contrast, beings who are conscious, but not self-conscious,
more nearly approximate the picture of receptacles for experiences of pleasure and pain, because their preferences will be of
a more immediate sort. They will not have desires that project
their images of their own existence into the future. Their conscious states are not internally linked over time. We can presume
that if fish become unconscious, then before the loss of consciousness they would have no expectations or desires for anything that might happen subsequently, and if they regain
consciousness, they have no awareness of having previously
existed. Therefore if the fish were killed while unconscious and
replaced by a similar number of other fish who could be created
only because the first group of fish were killed, there would,
from the perspective of fishy awareness, be no difference between that and the same fish losing and regaining consciousness.
For a non-self-conscious being death is the cessation of experiences, in much the same way that birth is the beginning of
experiences. Death cannot be contrary to an interest in continued life, any more than birth could be in accordance with an
interest in commencing life. To this extent, with non-selfconscious life, birth and death cancel each other out; whereas
with self-conscious beings the fact that once self-conscious one
126 

may desire to continue living means that death inflicts a loss
for which the birth of another is insufficient compensation.
The test of universalisability supports this view. If I imagine
myself in turn as a self-conscious being and a conscious but not
self-conscious being, it is only in the former case that I could
have forward-looking desires that extend beyond periods of
sleep or temporary unconsciousness, for example a desire to
complete my studies, a desire to have children, or simply a desire
to go on living, in addition to desires for immediate satisfaction
or pleasure, or to get out of painful or distressing situations.
Hence it is only in the former case that my death involves a
greater loss than just a temporary loss of consciousness, and is
not adequately compensated for by the creation of a being with
similar prospects of pleasurable experiences.
In reviewing the first edition of this book H. L. A. Hart, formerly professor of jurisprudence at the University of Oxford,
suggested that for a utilitarian, self-conscious beings must be
replaceable in just the same way as non-self-conscious beings
are. Whether one is a preference utilitarian or a classical utilitarian will, in Hart's view, make no difference here, because
preference Utilitarianism is after all a form of maximizing utilitarianism: it requires that the overall satisfaction of different persons' preferences be maximized just as Classical Utilitarianianism
requires overall experienced happiness to be maximized... If
preferences, even the desire to live, may be outweighed by the
preferences of others, why cannot they be outweighed by new
preferences created to take their place?
It is of course true that preference utilitarianism is a form of
maximising utilitarianism in the sense that it directs us to maximise the satisfaction of preferences, but Hart is on weaker
ground when he suggests that this must mean that existing
preferences can be outweighed by new preferences created to
take their place. For while the satisfaction of an existing preference is a good thing, the package deal that involves creating
127 

and then satisfying a preference need not be thought of as equivalent to it. Again, universalisability supports this way of conceiving preference utilitarianism. If I put myself in the place of
another with an unsatisfied preference, and ask myself if I want
that preference satisfied, the answer is (tautologically) yes. If,
however, I ask myself whether I wish to have a new preference
created that can then be satisfied, I will be quite uncertain. If I
think of a case in which the satisfaction of the preference will
be highly pleasurable, I may say yes. (We are glad that we are
hungry if delicious food is on the table before us, and strong
sexual desires are fine when we are able to satisfy them.) But
if I think of the creation of a preference that is more like a
privation, I will say no. (We don't cause ourselves headaches
simply in order to be able to take aspirin and thus satisfy our
desire to be free of the pain.) This suggests that the creation and
satisfaction of a preference is in itself neither good nor bad: our
response to the idea of the creation and satisfaction of a preference varies according to whether the experience as a whole
will be desirable or undesirable, in terms of other, long-standing
preferences we may have, for example for pleasure rather than
pain.
Exactly how preference utilitarianism ought to evaluate the
creation and satisfaction of a preference, as distinct from the
satisfaction of an existing preference, is a difficult issue. In my
initial response to Hart's criticism, I suggested that we think of
the creation of an unsatisfied preference as putting a debit in a
kind of moral ledger that is merely cancelled out by the satisfaction of the preference. (Some will see in this model confirmation of Marx's scornful remark that Bentham's utilitarianism
is a philosophy suitable for a nation of shopkeepers!) The 'moral
ledger' model has the advantage of explaining the puzzling
asymmetry mentioned in the previous chapter, in connection
with the difference between the total and the prior existence
interpretations of utilitarianism. We consider it wrong to bring
into existence a child who, because of a genetic defect, will lead
128 

a thoroughly miserable existence for a year or two and then
die; yet we do not consider it good or obligatory to bring into
existence a child who, in all probability, will lead a happy life.
The 'debit' view of preferences just outlined would explain why
this should be so: to bring into existence a child, most of whose
preferences we will be unable to satisfy, is to create a debit that
we cannot cancel. This is wrong. To create a child whose preferences will be able to be satisfied, is to create a debit that can
be cancelled. This is, in itself, I thought, ethically neutral. The
model can also explain why, in Parfit's example, what the two
women do is equally wrong - for both quite unnecessarily bring
into existence a child who is likely to have a larger negative
balance in the ledger than a child they could have brought into
existence.
Unfortunately, this same view carries a less desirable implication: it makes it wrong, other things being equal, to bring
into existence a child- who will on the whole be very happy,
and will be able to satisfy nearly all of her preferences, but will
still have some preferences unsatisfied. For if the creation of
each preference is a debit that is cancelled only when the desire
is satisfied, even the best life will, taken in itself, leave a small
debit in the ledger. Since everyone has some unsatisfied desires,
the conclusion to be drawn is that it would have been better if
none of us had been born. Thus the moral ledger model of
creating and satisfying a preference will not do. It might be
saved by attaching to it a stipulation that sets a given level of
preference satisfaction, below complete satisfaction, as a minim um for overcoming the negative entry opened by the creation
of a being with unsatisfied preferences. This might be the level
at which we consider a life ceases to be worth living, from the
perspective of the person leading that life. Such a solution seems
a little ad hoc, but it may be possible to incorporate it into a
plausible version of preference utilitarianism.
Another possibility is to take our model from Shakespeare,
who speaks of 'life's uncertain voyage', and see the lives of self129 

conscious beings as arduous and uncertain journeys, at different
stages, in which various amounts of hope and desire, as well
as time and effort have been invested in order to reach particular
goals or destinations. Suppose that I am thinking of travelling
to Nepal, where I plan to trek to Thyangboche Monastery, at
the base of Mt. Everest. I have always loved high mountains,
and I know that I would enjoy being in the Himalayas for the
first time. If during these early days of musing on the possibility
of such a trip an insuperable obstacle arises - perhaps the Nepalese government bans tourism on the grounds that it is an
environmental hazard - I will be a little put out, naturally, but
my disappointment will be nothing compared with what it
would have been if I had already arranged to take the necessary
time off work, perhaps bought a non-refundable plane ticket to
Kathmandu, or even trekked a long distance towards my destination, before being barred from reaching my goal. Similarly,
one can regard a decision not to bring an infant into the world
as akin to preventing a journey from getting underway, but this
is not in itself seriously wrong, for the voyager has made no
plans and set no goals. Gradually, as goals are set, even if tentatively, and a lot is done in order to increase the probability
of the goals being reached, the wrongness of bringing the journey to a premature end increases. Towards the end of life, when
most things that might have been achieved have either been
done, or are now unlikely to be accomplished, the loss of life
may again be less of tragedy than it would have been at an
earlier stage of life.
The great virtue of this 'journey' model of a life is that it can
explain why beings who can conceive of their own future existence and have embarked on their life journey are not replaceable, while at the same it can account for why it is wrong
to bring a miserable being into existence. To do so is to send a
being out on a journey that is doomed to disappointment and
frustration. The model also offers a natural explanation of why
Parfit's two women both do wrong, and to an equal degree:
130 

they both quite unnecessarily send out voyagers with fewer
prospects of making a successful journey than other voyagers
whom they might have placed at the starting line. The women's
children can be thought of as replaceable before the journey
begins, but this does not require us to hold that there is an
obligation to bring more children into existence, let alone to
regard people as replaceable once life's journey has properly
begun.
Both the modified moral ledger model and the journey model
are metaphors, and should not be taken too literally. At best
they suggest ways of thinking about when beings might be
considered replaceable, and when they might not be so considered. As I indicated in the Preface, this is an area in which fully
satisfactory answers are still to be found.
Before we leave the topic of killing non-self-conscious beings,
I should emphasise that to take the view that non-self-conscious
beings are replaceable is not to say that their interests do not
count. I hope that the third chapter of this book makes it clear
that their interests do count. As long as sentient beings are
conscious, they have an interest in experiencing as much pleasure and as little pain as possible. Sentience suffices to place a
being within the sphere of equal consideration of interests; but
it does not mean that the being has a personal interest in continuing to live.
CONCLUSIONS
If the arguments in this chapter are correct, there is no single
answer to the question: 'Is it normally wrong to take the life of
an animal?' The term 'animal' - even in the restricted sense of
'non-human animal' - covers too diverse a range of lives for
one principle to apply to all of them.
Some non-human animals appear to be rational and selfconscious, conceiving themselves as distinct beings with a past
and a future. When this is so, or to the best of our knowledge
131 

may be so, the case against killing is strong, as strong as the
case against killing permanently intellectually disabled human
beings at a similar mental level. (I have in mind here the direct
reasons against killing; the effects on relatives of the intellectually disabled human will sometimes - but not always - constitute additional indirect reasons against killing the human. For
further discussion of this issue, see Chapter 7.)
In the present state of our knowledge, this strong case against
killing can be invoked most categorically against the slaughter
of chimpanzees, gorillas, and orangutans. On the basis of what
we now know about these near-relatives of ours, we should
immediately extend to them the same full protection against
being killed that we extend now to all human beings. A case
can also be made, though with varying degrees of confidence,
on behalf of whales, dolphins, monkeys, dogs, cats, pigs, seals,
bears, cattle, sheep and so on, perhaps even to the point at
which it may include all mammals - much depends on how
far we are prepared to go in extending the benefit of the doubt,
where a doubt exists. Even if we stopped at the species I have
named, however - excluding the remainder of the mammals -
our discussion has raised a very large question mark over the
justifiability of a great deal of killing of animals carried out by
humans, even when this killing takes place painlessly and without causing suffering to other members of the animal community. (Most of this killing, of course, does not take place
under such ideal conditions.)
When we come to animals who, as far as we can tell, are not
rational and self-conscious beings, the case against killing is
weaker. When we are not dealing with beings aware of themselves as distinct entities, the wrongness of painless killing derives from the loss of pleasure it involves. Where the life taken
would not, on balance, have been pleasant, no direct wrong is
done. Even when the animal killed would have lived pleasantly,
it is at least arguable that no wrong is done if the animal killed
will, as a result of the killing, be replaced by another animal
132 

living an equally pleasant life. Taking this view involves holding
that a wrong done to an existing being can be made up for by
a benefit conferred on an as yet non-existent being. Thus it is
possible to regard non-self-conscious animals as interchangeable with each other in a way that self-conscious beings are not.
This means that in some circumstances - when animals lead
pleasant lives, are killed painlessly, their deaths do not cause
suffering to other animals, and the killing of one animal makes
possible its replacement by another who would not otherwise
have lived - the killing of non-self-conscious animals may
not be wrong.
^ Is it possible, along these lines, to justify raising chickens for
their meat, not in factory farm conditions but roaming freely
around a farmyard? Let us make the questionable assumption
that chickens are not self-conscious. Assume also that the birds
can be killed painlessly, and the survivors do not appear to be
affected by the death of one of their numbers. Assume, finally,
that for economic reasons we could not rear the birds if we did
not eat them. Then the replaceability argument appears to justify
killing the birds, because depriving them of the pleasures of
their existence can be offset against the pleasures of chickens
who do not yet exist, and will exist only if existing chickens are
killed.
As a piece of critical moral reasoning, this argument may be
sound. Even at that level, it is important to realise how limited
it is in its application. It cannot justify factory farming, where
animals do not have pleasant lives. Nor does it normally justify
the killing of wild animals. A duck shot by a hunter (making
the shaky assumption that ducks are not self-conscious, and the
almost certainly false assumption that the shooter can be relied
upon to kill the duck instantly) has probably had a pleasant
life, but the shooting of a duck does not lead to its replacement
by another. Unless the duck population is at the maximum that
can be sustained by the available food supply, the killing of a
duck ends a pleasant life without starting another, and is for
133
1 

that reason wrong on straightforward utilitarian grounds. So
although there are situations in which it is not wrong to kill
animals, these situations are special ones, and do not cover very
many of the billions of premature deaths humans inflict, year
after year, on animals.
In any case, at the level of practical moral principles, it would
be better to reject altogether the killing of animals for food,
unless one must do so to survive. Killing animals for food makes
us think of them as objects that we can use as we please. Their
lives then count for little when weighed against our mere wants.
As long as we continue to use animals in this way, to change
our attitudes to animals in the way that they should be changed
will be an impossible task. How can we encourage people to
respect animals, and have equal concern for their interests, if
they continue to eat them for their mere enjoyment? To foster
the right attitudes of consideration for animals, including nonself-conscious ones, it may be best to make it a simple principle
to avoid killing them for food.
134 
6
TAKING LIFE: THE EMBRYO
AND THE FETUS
THE PROBLEM
F
EW ethicalissues are as bitterly fought over today as abortion, and, while the pendulum has swung back and forth,
neither side has had much success in altering the opinions of
its opponents. Until 1967, abortion was illegal in almost all the
Western democracies except Sweden and Denmark. Then Britain changed its law to allow abortion on broad social grounds,
and in the 1973 case of Roe v Wade, the United States Supreme
Court held that women have a constitutional right to an abortion in the first six months of pregnancy. Western European
nations, including Roman Catholic countries like Italy, Spain
and France, all liberalised their abortion laws. Only the Republic
of Ireland held out against the trend.
Opponents of abortion did not give up. In the United States,
conservative Presidents have changed the composition of the
Supreme Court, which in turn has nibbled around the margins
of the Roe v Wade decision, allowing states to restrict, in various
ways, access to abortion. Outside the United States, the issue
of abortion re-surfaced in Eastern Europe after the collapse of
communism. The communist states had allowed abortion, but
as nationalist and religious forces gathered strength, there were
strong moves in countries like Poland for the re-introduction
of restrictive laws. Since West Germany had more restrictive
laws than East Germany, the need to introduce a single law for
a united Germany also caused an intense debate.
In 1978 the birth of Louise Brown raised a new issue about
135 

the status of early human life. For Louise Brown was the first
human to have been born from an embryo that had been fertilised outside a human body. The success of Robert Edwards
and Patrick Steptoe in demonstrating the possibility of in vitro
fertilization, or 1VF, was based on several years of experimentation on early human embryos - none of which had survived.
IVF is now a routine procedure for certain types of infertility,
and has given rise to thousands of healthy babies. To reach this
point, however, many more embryos had to be destroyed in
experiments, and further improvement of IVF techniques will
require continued experimentation. Perhaps more significant
still, for the long-term, are the possibilities for other forms of
experimentation opened up by the existence of a viable embryo
outside the human body. Embryos can now be frozen and stored
for many years before being thawed and implanted in a woman.
Normal children develop from these embryos, but the technique
means that there are large numbers of embryos now preserved
in special freezers around the world. (At the time of writing
there were about 11,000 frozen embryos in Australia alone.)
Because the IVF procedure often produces more embryos than
can safely be transferred to the uterus of the woman from whom
the egg came, many of these frozen embryos will never be
wanted, and presumably will either be destroyed, be donated
for research, or given to other infertile couples.
Other new technologies loom just a little way ahead. Embryos
can be screened for genetic abnormalities, and then discarded
if such abnormalities are found. Edwards has predicted that it
will become scientifically feasible to grow embryos in vitro to
the point at which, about 17 days after fertilisation, they develop
blood stem cells, which could be used to treat various nowlethal blood diseases. Others, speculating about the further future, have asked if one day we will have banks of embryos or
fetuses to provide organs for those who need them.
Abortion and destructive embryo experimentation pose dif136 

ficult ethical issues because the development of the human being
is a gradual process. If we take the fertilised egg immediately
after conception, it is hard to get upset about its death. The
fertilised egg is a single cell. After several days, it is still only a
tiny cluster of cells without a single anatomical feature of the
being it will later become. The cells that will eventually become
the embryo proper are at this stage indistinguishable from the
cells that will become the placenta and amniotic sac. Up to about
14 days after fertilisation, we cannot even tell if the embryo is
going to be one or two individuals, because splitting can take
place, leading to the fonriation of identical twins. At 14 days,
the first anatomical feature, the so-called primitive streak, appears in the position in which the backbone will later develop.
At this point the embryo could not possibly be conscious or feel
pain. At the other extreme is the adult human being. To kill a
human adult is murder, and, except in some special circumstances like those to be discussed in the next chapter, is unhesitatingly and universally condemned. Yet there is no obvious
sharp line that divides the fertilised egg from the adult. Hence
the problem.
Most of this chapter will be concerned with the problem of
abortion, but the discussion of the status of the fetus will have
obvious implications for two related issues: embryo experimentation, and the use of fetal tissue for medical purposes. I
begin the discussion of abortion stating the position of those
opposed to abortion, which I shall refer to as the conservative
position. I shall then examine some of the standard liberal responses, and show why they are inadequate. Finally I shall use
our earlier discussion of the value of life to approach the issue
from a broader perspective. In contrast to the common opinion
that the moral question about abortion is a dilemma with no
solution, I shall show that, at least within the bounds of nonreligious ethics, there is a clear-cut answer and those who take
a different view are simply mistaken.
137 

THE CONSERVATIVE POSITION
The central argument against abortion, put as a formal argument, would go something like this:
First premise: It is wrong to kill an innocent human being.
Second premise: A human fetus is an innocent human being.
Conclusion: Therefore it is wrong to kill a human fetus.
The usual liberal response is to deny the second premise of
this argument. So it is on whether the fetus is a human being
that the issue is joined, and the dispute about abortion is often
taken to be a dispute about when a human life begins.
On this issue the conservative position is difficult to shake.
The conservative points to the continuum between the fertilised
egg and child, and challenges the liberal to point to any stage
in this gradual process that marks a morally significant dividing
line. Unless there is such a line, the conservative says, we
must either upgrade the status of the earliest embryo to that
of the child, or downgrade the status of the child to that of
the embryo; but no one wants to allow children to be dispatched on the request of their parents, and so the only tenable
position is to grant the fetus the protection we now grant the
child.
Is it true that there is no morally significant dividing line
between fertilised egg and child? Those commonly suggested
are: birth, viability, quickening, and the onset of consciousness.
Let us consider these in turn.
Birth
Birth is the most visible possible dividing line, and the one that
would suit liberals best. It coincides to some extent with our
sympathies - we are less disturbed at the destruction of a fetus
we have never seen than at the death of a being we can all see,
hear and cuddle. But is this enough to make birth the line that
138 

decides whether a being may or may not be killed? The conservative can plausibly reply that the fetus/baby is the same
entity, whether inside or outside the womb, with the same
human features (whether we can see them or not) and the same
degree of awareness and capacity for feeling pain. A prematurely
born infant may well be less developed in these respects than a
fetus nearing the end of its normal term. It seems peculiar to
hold that we may not kill the premature infant, but may kill
the more developed fetus. The location of a being - inside or
outside the womb - should not make that rrfuch difference to
the wrongness of killing it.
Viability
If birth does not mark a crucial moral distinction, should we
push the line back to the time at which the fetus could survive
outside the womb? This overcomes one objection to taking birth
as the decisive point, for it treats the viable fetus on a par with
the infant, born prematurely, at the same stage of development.
Viability is where the United States Supreme Court drew the
line in Roe v. Wade. The Court held that the state has a legitimate
interest in protecting potential life, and this interest becomes
'compelling' at viability 'because the fetus then presumably has
the capability of meaningful life outside the mother's womb'.
Therefore statutes prohibiting abortion after viability would not,
the Court said, be unconstitutional. But the judges who wrote
the majority decision gave no indication why the mere capacity
to exist outside the womb should make such a difference to the
state's interest in protecting potential life. After all, if we talk,
as the Court does, of potential human life, then the nonviable
fetus is as much a potential adult human as the viable fetus. (I
shall return to this issue of potentiality shortly; but it is a different issue from the conservative argument we are now discussing, which claims that the fetus is a human being, and not
just a potential human being.)
139 

There is another important objection to making viability the
cut-off point. The point at which the fetus can survive outside
the mother's body varies according to the state of medical
technology. Thirty years ago it was generally accepted that a
baby born more than two months premature could not survive.
Now a six-month fetus - three months premature - can often
be pulled through, thanks to sophisticated medical techniques,
and fetuses born after as little as five and a half months of
gestation have survived. This threatens to undermine the Supreme Court's neat division of pregnancy into trimesters, with
the boundary of viability lying between the second and third
trimesters.
In the light of these medical developments, do we say that a
six-month-old fetus should not be aborted now, but could have
been aborted without wrongdoing thirty years ago? The same
comparison can also be made, not between the present and the
past, but between different places. A six-month-old fetus might
have a fair chance of survival if born in a city where the latest
medical techniques are used, but no chance at all if born in a
remote village in Chad or New Guinea. Suppose that for some
reason a woman, six months pregnant, was to fly from New
York to a New Guinea village and that, once she had arrived
in the village, there was no way she could return quickly to a
city with modern medical facilities. Are we to say that it would
have been wrong for her to have an abortion before she left
New York, but now that she is in the village she may go ahead?
The trip does not change the nature of the fetus, so why should
it remove its claim to life?
The liberal might reply that the fact that the fetus is totally
dependent on the mother for its survival means that it has no
right to life independent of her wishes. In other cases, however,
we do not hold that total dependence on another person means
that that person may decide whether one lives or dies. A newborn baby is totally dependent on its mother, if it happens to
140 

be born in an isolated area in which there is no other lactating
woman, nor the means for bottle feeding. An elderly woman
may be totally dependent on her son looking after her, and a
hiker who breaks her leg five days' walk from the nearest road
may die if her companion does not bring help. We do not think
that in these situations the mother may take the life qf her baby,
the son of his aged mother, or the hiker of her injured companion. So it is not plausible to suggest that the dependence of
the nonviable fetus on its mother gives her the right to kill it;
and if dependence does not justify making viability the dividing
line, it is hard to see what does.
Quickening
If neither birth nor viability marks a morally significant distinction, there is less still to be said for a third candidate,
quickening. Quickening is the time when the mother first feels
the fetus move, and in traditional Catholic theology, this was
thought to be the moment at which the fetus gained its soul.
If we accepted that view, we might think quickening important, since the soul is, on the Christian view, what marks
humans off from animals. But the idea that the soul enters
the fetus at quickening is an outmoded piece of superstition,
discarded now even by Catholic theologians. Putting aside
these religious doctrines makes quickening insignificant. It is
no more than the time when the fetus is first felt to move of
its own accord; the fetus is alive before this moment, and
ultrasound studies have shown that fetuses do in fact start
moving as early as six weeks after fertilization, long before
they can be felt to move. In any case, the capacity for physical
motion - or the lack of it - has nothing to do with the
seriousness of one's claim for continued life. We do not see
the lack of such a capacity as negating the claims of paralysed
people to go on living.
141 

Consciousness
Movement might be thought to be indirectly of moral significance, in so far as it is an indication of some form of awareness
- and as we have already seen, consciousness, and the capacity
to feel pleasure or pain, are of real moral significance. Despite
this, neither side in the abortion debate has made much mention of the development of consciousness in the fetus. Those
opposed to abortion may show films about the 'silent scream'
of the fetus when aborted, but the intention behind such films
is merely to stir the emotions of the uncommitted. Opponents
of abortion really want to uphold the right to life of the human
being from conception, irrespective of whether it is conscious
or not. For those in favour of abortion, to appeal to the absence
of a capacity for consciousness has seemed a risky strategy.
On the basis of the studies showing that movement takes place
as early as six weeks after fertilization, coupled with other
studies that have found some brain activity as early as the
seventh week, it has been suggested that the fetus could be
capable of feeling pain at this early stage of pregnancy. That
possibility has made liberals very wary of appealing to the
onset of consciousness as a point at which the fetus has a
right to life. We shall return to the issue of consciousness in
the fetus later in this chapter, because it is relevant to the
issue of embryo and fetal experimentation. We will also then
consider an earlier marker that could be relevant to embryo
experimentation, but not to the abortion debate. As far as
abortion is concerned, the discussion up to now has shown
that the liberal search for a morally crucial dividing line between the newborn baby and the fetus has failed to yield any
event or stage of development that can bear the weight of
separating those with a right to life from those who lack such
a right, in a way that clearly shows fetuses to be in the latter
category at the stage of development when most abortions
take place. The conservative is on solid ground in insisting
142 

that the development from the embryo to the infant is a gradual
process.
SOME LIBERAL ARGUMENTS
Some liberals do not challenge the conservative claim that the
fetus is an innocent human being, but argue that abortion is
nonetheless permissible. I shall consider three arguments for
this view.
The Consequences of Restrictive Laws
The first argument is that laws prohibiting abortion do not stop
abortions, but merely drive them underground. Women who
want to have abortions are often desperate. They will go to
backyard abortionists or try folk remedies. Abortion performed
by a qualified medical practitioner is as safe as any medical
operation, but attempts to procure abortions by unqualified people often result in serious medical complications and sometimes
death. Thus the effect of prohibiting abortion is not so much to
reduce the number of abortions performed as to increase the
difficulties and dangers for women with unwanted pregnancies.
This argument has been influential in gaining support for
more liberal abortion laws. It was accepted by the Canadian
Royal Commission on the Status of Women, which concluded
that: 'A law that has more bad effects than good ones is a bad
law.. . As long as it exists in its present form thousands of
women will break it.'
The main point to note about this argument is that it is an
argument against laws prohibiting abortion, and not an argument against the view that abortion is wrong. This is an important distinction, often overlooked in the abortion debate.
The present argument well illustrates the distinction, because
one could quite consistently accept it and advocate that the law
should allow abortion on request, while at the same time de143 

ciding oneself - if one were pregnant - or counselling another
w ho was pregnant, that it would be wrong to have an abortion.
It is a mistake to assume that the law should always enforce
morality. It may be that, as alleged in the case of abortion,
attempts to enforce right conduct lead to consequences no one
wants, and no decrease in wrong-doing; or it may be that, as
is proposed by the next argument we shall consider, there is an
area of private ethics with which the law ought not to interfere.
So this first argument is an argument about abortion law, not
about the ethics of abortion. Even within those limits, however,
it is open to challenge, for it fails to meet the conservative claim
that abortion is the deliberate killing of an innocent human
being, and in the same ethical category as murder. Those who
take this view of abortion will not rest content with the assertion
that restrictive abortion laws do no more than drive women to
backyard abortionists. They will insist that this situation can be
changed, and the law properly enforced. They may also suggest
measures to make pregnancy easier to accept for those women
w ho become pregnant against their wishes. This is a perfectly
reasonable response, given the initial ethical judgment against
abortion, and for this reason the first argument does not succeed
in avoiding the ethical issue.
Not the Law's Business?
The second argument is again an argument about abortion laws
rather than the ethics of abortion. It uses the view that, as the
report of a British government committee inquiring into laws
about homosexuality and prostitution put it: 'There must remain a realm of private morality and immorality that is, in brief
and crude terms, not the law's business.' This view is widely
accepted among liberal thinkers, and can be traced back to John
Stuart Mill's On Liberty. The'one very simple principle' of this
work is, in Mill's words:
144 

That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised
over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is
to prevent harm to others... He cannot rightfully be compelled
to do or forbear because it will be better for him to do so, because
it will make him happier, because in the opinions of others, to
do so would be wise or even right.
Mill's view is often and properly quoted in support of the repeal
of laws that create 'victimless crimes' - like laws prohibiting
homosexual relations between consenting adults, the use of
marijuana and other drugs, prostitution, gambling and so on.
Abortion is often included in this list, for example by the criminologist Edwin Schur in his book Crimes Without Victims. Those
who consider abortion a victimless crime say that, while everyone is entitled to hold and act on his or her own view about
the morality of abortion, no section of the community should
try to force others to adhere to its own particular view. In a
pluralist society, we should tolerate others with different moral
views and leave the decision to have an abortion up to the
woman concerned.
The fallacy involved in numbering abortion among the victimless crimes should be obvious. The dispute about abortion
is, largely, a dispute about whether or not abortion does have
a 'victim'. Opponents of abortion maintain that the victim of
abortion is the fetus. Those not opposed to abortion may deny
that the fetus counts as a victim in any serious way. They might,
for instance, say that a being cannot be a victim unless it has
interests that are violated, and the fetus has no interests. But
however this dispute may go, one cannot simply ignore it on
the grounds that people should not attempt to force others to
follow their own moral views. My view that what Hitler did to
the Jews is wrong is a moral view, and if there were any prospect
of a revival of Nazism I would certainly do my best to force
others not to act contrary to this view. Mill's principle is defensible only if it is restricted, as Mill restricted it, to acts that do
not harm others. To use the principle as a means of avoiding
145 

the difficulties of resolving the ethical dispute over abortion is
to take it for granted that abortion does not harm an 'other' -
which is precisely the point that needs to be proven before we
can legitimately apply the principle to the case of abortion.
A Feminist Argument
The last of the three arguments that seek to justify abortion
without denying that the fetus is an innocent human being is
that a woman has a right to choose what happens to her own
body. This argument became prominent with the rise of the
women's liberation movement and has been elaborated by
American philosophers sympathetic to feminism. An influential
argument has been presented by Judith Jarvis Thomson by
means of an ingenious analogy. Imagine, she says, that you
wake up one morning and find yourself in a hospital bed, somehow connected to an unconscious man in an adjacent bed. You
are told that this man is a famous violinist with kidney disease.
The only way he can survive is for his circulatory system to be
plugged into the system of someone else with the same blood
type, and you are the only person whose blood is suitable. So
a society of music lovers kidnapped you, had the connecting
operation performed, and there you are. Since you are now in
a reputable hospital you could, if you choose, order a doctor to
disconnect you from the violinist; but the violinist will then
certainly die. On the other hand, if you remain connected for
only (only?) nine months, the violinist will have recovered and
you can be unplugged without endangering him.
Thomson believes that if you found yourself in this unexpected predicament you would not be morally required to allow
the violinist to use your kidneys for nine months. It might be
generous or kind of you to do so, but to say this is, Thomson
claims, quite different from saying that you would be doing
wrong if you did not do it.
146 

Note that Thomson's conclusion does not depend on denying
that the violinist is an innocent human being, with the same
right to life as any other innocent human being. On the contrary,
Thomson affirms that the violinist does have a right to life -
but to have a right to life does not, she says, entail a right to
the use of another's body, even if without that use one will die.
The parallel with pregnancy, especially pregnancy due to rape
should be obvious. A woman pregnant through rape finds herself, through no choice of her own, linked to a fetus in much
the same way as the person is linked to the violinist. True, a
pregnant woman does not normally have to spend nine months
in bed, but opponents of abortion would not regard this as a
sufficient justification for abortion. Giving up a newborn baby
for adoption might be more difficult, psychologically, than parting from the violinist at the end of his illness; but this in itself
does not seem a sufficient reason for killing the fetus. Accepting
for the sake of the argument that the fetus does count as a fullyfledged human being, having an abortion when the fetus is not
viable has the same moral significance as unplugging oneself
from the violinist. So if we agree with Thomson that it would
not be wrong to unplug oneself from the violinist, we must also
accept that, whatever the status of the fetus, abortion is not
wrong - at least not when the pregnancy results from rape.
Thomson's argument can probably be extended beyond cases
of rape. Suppose that you found yourself connected to the violinist, not because you were kidnapped by music lovers, but
because you had intended to enter the hospital to visit a sick
friend, and when you got into the elevator, you carelessly
pressed the wrong button, and ended up in a section of the
hospital normally visited only by those who have volunteered
to be connected to patients who would not otherwise survive.
A team of doctors, waiting for the next volunteer, assumed you
were it, jabbed you with an anaesthetic, and connected you. If
Thomson's argument was sound in the kidnap case it is
probably sound here too, since nine months unwillingly sup147 

porting another is a high price to pay for ignorance or carelessness. In this way the argument might apply beyond rape
cases to the much larger number of women who become pregnant through ignorance, carelessness, or contraceptive failure.
But is the argument sound? The short answer is this: It is
sound if the particular theory of rights that lies behind it is
sound; and it is unsound if that theory of rights is unsound.
The theory of rights in question can be illustrated by another
of Thomson's fanciful examples: suppose I am desperately ill
and the only thing that can save my life is the touch of my
favourite film star's cool hand on my fevered brow. Well, Thomson says, even though I have a right to life, this does not mean
that I have a right to force the film star to come to me, or that
he is under any, moral obligation to fly over and save me -
although it would be frightfully nice of him to do so. Thus
Thomson does not accept that we are always obliged to take
the best course of action, all things considered, or to do what
has the best consequences. She accepts, instead, a system of
rights and obligations that allows us to justify our actions independently of their consequences.
I shall say more about this conception of rights in Chapter 8.
At this stage it is enough to notice that a utilitarian would reject
this theory of rights, and would reject Thomson's judgment in
the case of the violinist. The utilitarian would hold that, however
outraged I may be at having been kidnapped, if the consequences of disconnecting myself from the violinist are, on balance, and taking into account the interests of everyone affected,
worse than the consequences of remaining connected, I ought
to remain connected. This does not necessarily mean that utilitarians would regard a woman who disconnected herself as
wicked or deserving of blame. They might recognize that she
has been placed in an extraordinarily difficult situation, one in
which to do what is right involves a considerable sacrifice. They
might even grant that most people in this situation would follow
148 

self-interest rather than do the right thing. Nevertheless, they
would hold that to disconnect oneself is wrong.
In rejecting Thomson's theory of rights, and with it her judgment in the case of the violinist, the utilitarian would also be
rejecting her argument for abortion. Thomson claimed that her
argument justified abortion even if we allowed the life of the
fetus to count as heavily as the life of a normal person. The
utilitarian would say that it would be wrong to refuse to sustain
a person's life for nine months, if that was the only way the
person could survive. Therefore if the life of the fetus is given
the same weight as the life of a normal person, the utilitarian
would say that it would be wrong to refuse to carry the fetus
until it can survive outside the womb.
This concludes our discussion of the usual liberal replies to
the conservative argument against abortion. We have seen that
liberals have failed to establish a morally significant dividing
line between the newborn baby and the fetus, and their arguments - with the possible exception of Thomson's argument if
her theory of rights can be defended - also fail to justify abortion
in ways that do not challenge the conservative claim that the
fetus is an innocent human being. Nevertheless, it would be
premature for conservatives to assume that their case against
abortion is sound. It is now time to bring into this debate some
more general conclusions about the value of life.
THE VALUE OF FETAL LIFE
Let us go back to the beginning. The central argument against
abortion from which we started was:
First premise: It is wrong to kill an innocent human being.
Second premise: A human fetus is an innocent human being.
Conclusion: Therefore it is wrong to kill a human fetus.
The first set of replies we considered accepted the first premise
of this argument but objected to the second. The second set of
149 

replies rejected neither premise, but objected to drawing the
conclusion from these premises (or objected to the further conclusion that abortion should be prohibited by law). None of the
replies questioned the first premise of the argument. Given the
widespread acceptance of the doctrine of the sanctity of human
life, this is not surprising; but the discussion of this doctrine in
the preceding chapters shows that this premise is less secure
than many people think.
The weakness of the first premise of the conservative argument is that it relies on our acceptance of the special status of
human life. We have seen that 'human' is a term that straddles
two distinct notions: being a member of the species Homo sapiens, and being a person. Once the term is dissected in this way,
the weakness of the conservative's first premise becomes apparent. If 'human' is taken as equivalent to 'person', the second
premise of the argument, which asserts that the fetus is a human
being, is clearly false; for one cannot plausibly argue that a fetus
is either rational or self-conscious. If, on the other hand, 'human' is taken to mean no more than 'member of the species
Homo sapiens', then the conservative defence of the life of the
fetus is based on a characteristic lacking moral significance and
so the first premise is false. The point should by now be familiar:
whether a being is or is not a member of our species is, in itself
no more relevant to the wrongness of killing it than whether it
is or is not a member of our race. The belief that mere membership of our species, irrespective of other characteristics,
makes a great difference to the wrongness of killing a being is
a legacy of religious doctrines that even those opposed to abortion hesitate to bring into the debate.
Recognising this simple point transforms the abortion issue.
We can now look at the fetus for what it is - the actual characteristics it possesses - and can value its life on the same scale
as the lives of beings with similar characteristics who are not
members of our species. It now becomes apparent that the 'Pro
Life' or 'Right to Life' movement is misnamed. Far from having
150 

concern for all life, or a scale of concern impartially based on
the nature of the life in question, those who protest against
abortion but dine regularly on the bodies of chickens, pigs and
calves, show only a biased concern for the lives of members of
our own species. For on any fair comparison of morally relevant
characteristics, like rationality, self-consciousness, awareness,
autonomy, pleasure and pain, and so on, the calf, the pig and
the much derided chicken come out well ahead of the fetus at
any stage of pregnancy - while if we make the comparison with
a fetus of less than three months, a fish would show more signs
of consciousness.
My suggestion, then, is that we accord the life of a fetus no
greater value than the life of a nonhuman animal at a similar
level of rationality, self-consciousness, awareness, capacity to
feel, etc. Since no fetus is a person, no fetus has the same claim
to life as a person. We have yet to consider at what point the
fetus is likely to become capable of feeling pain. For now it will
be enough to say that until that capacity exists, an abortion
terminates an existence that is of no "intrinsic" value at all.
Afterwards, when the fetus may be conscious, though not selfconscious, abortion should not be taken lightly (if a woman
ever does take abortion lightly). But a woman's serious interests
would normally override the rudimentary interests even of a
conscious fetus. Indeed, even an abortion late in pregnancy for
the most trivial reasons is hard to condemn unless we also
condemn the slaughter of far more developed forms of life for
the taste of their flesh.
The comparison between the fetus and other animals leads
us to one more point. Where the balance of conflicting interests
does make it necessary to kill a sentient creature, it is important
that the killing be done as painlessly as possible. In the case of
nonhuman animals the importance of humane killing is widely
accepted; oddly, in the case of abortion little attention is paid
to it. This is not because abortion is known to kill the fetus
swiftly and humanely. Late abortions - which are the very ones
151 

in which the fetus may be able to suffer - are sometimes performed by injecting a salt solution into the amniotic sac that
surrounds the fetus. It has been claimed that the effect of this
is to cause the fetus to have convulsions and die between one
and three hours later. Afterwards the dead fetus is expelled from
the womb. If there are grounds for thinking that a method of
abortion causes the fetus to suffer, that method should be
avoided.
THE FETUS AS POTENTIAL LIFE
One likely objection to the argument I have offered in the preceding section is that it takes into account only the actual characteristics of the fetus, and not its potential characteristics. On
the basis of its actual characteristics, some opponents of abortion
will admit, the fetus compares unfavourably with many nonhuman animals; it is when we consider its potential to become
a mature human being that membership of the species Homo
sapiens becomes important, and the fetus far surpasses any
chicken, pig or calf.
Up to this point I have not raised the question of the potential
of the fetus because I thought it best to concentrate on the central
argument against abortion; but it is true that a different argument, based on the potential of the fetus, can be mounted. Now
is the time to look at this other argument. We can state it as
follows:
First premise: It is wrong to kill a potential human being.
Second premise: A human fetus is a potential human being.
Conclusion: Therefore it is wrong to kill a human fetus.
The second premise of this argument is stronger than the
second premise of the preceding argument. Whereas it is problematic whether a fetus actually is a human being - it depends
on what we mean by the term - it cannot be denied that the
152 

fetus is a potential human being. This is true whether by 'human
being' we mean 'member of the species Homo sapiens' or a
rational and self-conscious being, a person. The strong second
premise of the new argument is, however, purchased at the cost
of a weaker first premise, for the wrongness of killing a potential
human being - even a potential person - is more open to challenge than the wrongness of killing an actual human being.
It is of course true that the potential rationality, selfconsciousness and so on of a fetal Homo sapiens surpasses that
of a cow or pig; but it does not follow that the fetus has a
stronger claim to life. There is no rule that says that a potential
X has the same value as an X, or has all the rights of an X.
There are many examples that show just the contrary. To pull
out a sprouting acorn is not the same as cutting down a venerable oak. To drop a live chicken into a pot of boiling water
would be much worse than doing the same to an egg. Prince
Charles is a potential King of England, but he does not now
have the rights of a king.
In the absence of any general inference from 'A is a potential
X' to 'A has the rights of an X', we should not accept that a
potential person should have the rights of a person, unless we
can be given some specific reason why this should hold in this
particular case. But what could that reason be? This question
becomes especially pertinent if we recall the grounds on which,
in the previous chapter, it was suggested that the life of a person
merits greater protection than the life of a being who is not a
person. These reasons - from the indirect classical utilitarian
concern with not arousing in others the fear that they may be
the next killed, the weight given by the preference utilitarian
to a person's desires, Tooley's link between a right to life and
the capacity to see oneself as a continuing mental subject, and
the principle of respect for autonomy - are all based on the fact
that persons see themselves as distinct entities with a past and
future. They do not apply to those who are not now and never
153 

have been capable of seeing themselves in this way. If these are
the grounds for not killing persons, the mere potential for becoming a person does not count against killing.
It might be said that this reply misunderstands the relevance
of the potential of the human fetus, and that this potential is
important, not because it creates in the fetus a right or claim to
life, but because anyone who kills a human fetus deprives the
world of a future rational and self-conscious being. If rational
and self-conscious beings are intrinsically valuable, to kill a
human fetus is to deprive the world of something intrinsically
valuable, and so wrong. The chief problem with this as an argument against abortion - apart from the difficulty of establishing that rational and self-conscious beings are of intrinsic
value - is that it does not stand up as a reason for objecting to
all abortions, or even to abortions carried out merely because
the pregnancy is inconveniently timed. Moreover the argument
leads us to condemn practices other than abortion that most
anti-abortionists accept.
The claim that rational and self-conscious beings are intrinsically valuable is not a reason for objecting to all abortions
because not all abortions deprive the world of a rational and
self-conscious being. Suppose a woman has been planning to
join a mountain-climbing expedition in June, and in January
she learns that she is two months pregnant. She has no children
at present, and firmly intends to have a child within a year or
two. The pregnancy is unwanted only because it is inconveniently timed. Opponents of abortion would presumably think
an abortion in these circumstances particularly outrageous, for
neither the life nor the health of the mother is at stake - only
the enjoyment she gets from climbing mountains. Yet if abortion
is wrong only because it deprives the world of a future person,
this abortion is not wrong; it does no more than delay the entry
of a person into the world.
On the other hand this argument against abortion does lead
us to condemn practices that reduce the future human popu154 

lation: contraception, whether by 'artificial' means or by 'natural' means such as abstinence on days when the woman is
likely to be fertile; and also celibacy. This argument has, in fact,
all the difficulties of the 'total' form of utilitarianism, discussed
in the previous two chapters, and it does not provide any reason
for thinking abortion worse than any other means of population
control. If the world is already overpopulated, the argument
provides no reason at all against abortion.
Is there any other significance in the fact that the fetus is a
potential person? If there is I have no idea what it could be. In
writings against abortion we often find reference to the fact that
each human fetus is unique. Paul Ramsey, a former Professor
of Religion at Princeton University, has said that modern genetics, by teaching us that the first fusion of sperm and ovum
creates a 'never-to-be-repeated' informational speck, seems to
lead us to the conclusion that 'all destruction of fetal life should
be classified as murder'. But why should this fact lead us to this
conclusion? A canine fetus is also, no doubt, genetically unique.
Does this mean that it is as wrong to abort a dog as a human?
When identical twins are conceived, the genetic information is
repeated. Would Ramsey therefore think it permissible to abort
one of a pair of identical twins? The children that my wife and
I would produce if we did not use contraceptives would be
genetically unique. Does the fact that it is still indeterminate
precisely what genetically unique character those children
would have make the use of contraceptives less evil than abortion? Why should it? And if it does could the looming prospect
of successful cloning - a technique in which the cells of one
individual are used to reproduce a fetus that is a genetic carbon
copy of the original - diminish the seriousness of abortion?
Suppose the woman who wants to go mountain climbing were
able to have her abortion, take a cell from the aborted fetus and
then reimplant that cell in her womb so that an exact genetic
replica of the aborted fetus would develop - the only difference
being that the pregnancy would now come to term six months
155 

later, and thus she could still join the expedition. Would that
make the abortion acceptable? I doubt that many opponents of
abortion would think so.
THE STATUS OF THE EMBRYO IN THE LABORATORY
It is now time to turn to the debate about experimenting on
early human embryos, kept alive in a special fluid, outside the
human body. This is a relatively new debate, because the possibility of keeping an embryo alive outside the body is new; but
in many respects it goes over the same ground as the abortion
debate. Although one central argument for abortion - the claim
that a woman has the right to control her own body - is not
directly applicable in the newer context, the argument against
embryo experimentation relies on one of the two claims we
have already examined: either that the embryo is entitled to
protection because it is a human being, or that the embryo is
entitled to protection because it is a potential human being.
One might therefore think that the case against embryo experimentation is stronger than the case for abortion. For one
argument in favour of abortion does not apply, while the major
arguments against abortion do. In fact, however, the two arguments against abortion do not apply as straightforwardly as
one might imagine to the embryo in the laboratory.
First, is the embryo already a human being? We have already
seen that claims for a right to life should not be based on species
membership, so the fact that the embryo is of the species Homo
sapiens does not show that the embryo is a human being in any
morally relevant sense. And if the fetus is not a person, it is
even more apparent that the embryo cannot be one. But there
is a further interesting point to be made against the claim that
the early embryo is a human being: human beings are individuals, and the early embryo is not even an individual. At any
time up to about 14 days after fertilisation - and that is longer
than human embryos have so far been kept alive outside the
156 

body - the embryo can split into two or more genetically identical embryos. This happens naturally and leads to the formation
of identical twins. When we have an embryo prior to this point,
we cannot be sure if what we are looking at is the precursor of
one or two individuals.
This poses a problem for those who stress the continuity of
our existence from conception to adulthood. Suppose we have
an embryo in a dish on a laboratory bench. If we think of this
embryo as the first stage of an individual human being, we might
call it Mary. But now suppose the embryo divides into two
identical embryos. Is one of them still Mary, and the other Jane?
If so, which one is Mary? There is nothing to distinguish the
two, no way of saying that the one we call Jane split off from
the one we call Mary, rather than vice versa. So should we say
that Mary is no longer with us, and instead we have Jane and
Helen? But what happened to Mary? Did she die? Should we
grieve for her? There is something absurd about these speculations. The absurdity stems from thinking of the embryo as an
individual at a time at which it is only a cluster of cells. So,
until the possibility of twinning is past, it is even more difficult
to maintain that the embryo is a human being, in any morally
significant sense, than it is to maintain that the fetus is a human
being in a morally significant sense. This provides some basis
for the laws and guidelines in Britain and various other countries
that allow experimentation on the embryo up to 14 days after
fertilisation. But for reasons already given, and others that we
are about to discuss, this is still an unnecessarily restrictive limit.
What of the argument from potential? Can the familiar claims
about the potential of the embryo in the uterus be applied to
the embryo in a dish in the laboratory? Before Robert Edwards
began the research that led to the IVF procedure, no-one had
observed a viable human embryo prior to the stage at which it
implants in the wall of the uterus. In the normal process of
reproduction inside the body, the embryo, or 'pre-embryo' as
it is now sometimes called, remains unattached for the first
157 

seven to fourteen days. As long as such embryos existed only
inside the woman's body, there was no way of observing them
during that period. The very existence of the embryo could not
be established until after implantation. Under these circumstances, once the existence of an embryo was known, that embryo had a good chance of becoming a person, unless its
development was deliberately interrupted. The probability of
such an embryo becoming a person was therefore very much
greater than the probability of an egg in a fertile woman uniting
with sperm from that woman's partner and leading to a child.
There was also, in those pre-IVF days, a further important
distinction between the embryo and the egg and sperm.
Whereas the embryo inside the female body has some definite
chance (we shall consider later how great a chance) of developing into a child unless a deliberate human act interrupts its
growth, the egg and sperm can only develop into a child if there
is a deliberate human act. So in the one case, all that is needed
for the embryo to have a prospect of realising its potential is for
those involved to refrain from stopping it; in the other case, they
have to carry out a positive act. The development of the embryo
inside the female body can therefore be seen as a mere unfolding
of a potential that is inherent in it. (Admittedly, this is an oversimplification, for it takes no account of the positive acts involved in childbirth; but it is close enough.) The development
of the separated egg and sperm is more difficult to regard in this
way, because no further development will take place unless the
couple have sexual intercourse or use artificial insemination.
Now consider what has happened as a result of the success
of IVF. The procedure involves removing one or more eggs from
a woman's ovary, placing them in the appropriate fluid in a
glass dish, and then adding sperm to the dish. In the more
proficient laboratories, this leads to fertilisation in about 80%
of the eggs thus treated. The embryo can then be kept in the
dish for two to three days, while it grows and divides into two,
four, and then eight cells. At about this stage the embryo is
158 

usually transferred to a woman's uterus. Although the transfer
itself is a simple procedure, it is after the transfer that things are
most likely to go wrong: for reasons that are not fully understood, with even the most successful IVF teams, the probability
of a given embryo that has been transferred to the uterus actually
implanting there, and leading to a continuing pregnancy, is
always less than 20%, and generally no more than 10%. In
summary, then, before the advent of IVF, in every instance in
which we knew of the existence of a normal human embryo,
it would have been true to say of that embryo that, unless it
was deliberately interfered with, it would most likely develop
into a person. The process of IVF, however, leads to the creation
of embryos that cannot develop into a person unless there is
some deliberate human act (the transfer to the uterus) and that
even then, in the best of circumstances, will most likely not
develop into a person.
The upshot of all this is that IVF has reduced the difference
between what can be said about the embryo, and what can be
said about the egg and sperm, when still separate, but considered
as a pair. Before IVF, any normal human embryo known to us
had a far greater chance of becoming a child than any egg plus
sperm prior to fertilisation taking place. But with IVF, there is
a much more modest difference in the probability of a child
resulting from a 2-cell embryo in a glass dish, and the probability
of a child resulting from an egg and some sperm in a glass dish.
To be specific, if we assume that the laboratory's fertilisation
rate is 80% and its rate of pregnancy per embryo transferred is
10%, then the probability of a child resulting from a given
embryo is 10%, and the probability of a child resulting from an
egg that has been placed in a fluid to which sperm has been
added is 8%. So if the embryo is a potential person, why are
not the egg-and-^perm, considered jointly, also a potential person? Yet no member of the pro-life movement wants to rescue
eggs and sperm in order to save the lives of the people that they
have the potential to become.
159 

Consider the following, not too improbable scenario. In the
IVF laboratory, a woman's egg has been obtained. It sits in one
dish on the bench. The sperm from her partner sits in an adjacent
dish, ready to be mixed into the solution containing the egg.
Then some bad news arrives: the woman is bleeding from the
uterus, and will not be in a suitable condition to receive an
embryo for at least a month. There is therefore no point in going
ahead with the procedure. A laboratory assistant is told to dispose of the egg and sperm. She does so by tipping them down
the sink. So far, so good; but a few hours later, when the
assistant returns to prepare the laboratory for the next procedure, she notices that the sink is blocked. The egg and its fluid
are still there, in the bottom of the sink. She is about to clear
the blockage, when she realizes that the sperm has been tipped
into the sink too. Quite possibly, the egg has been fertilised!
Now what is she to do? Those who draw a sharp distinction
between the egg-and-sperm and the embryo must hold that,
while the assistant was quite entitled to pour the egg and sperm
down the sink, it would be wrong to clear the blockage now.
This is difficult to accept. Potentiality seems not to be such an
all-or-nothing concept; the difference between the egg-andsperm and the embryo is one of degree, related to the probability
of development into a person.
Traditional defenders of the right to life of the embryo have
been reluctant to introduce degrees of potential into the debate,
because once the notion is accepted, it seems undeniable that
the early embryo is less of a potential person than the later
embryo or the fetus. This could easily be understood as leading
to the conclusion that the prohibition against destroying the
early embryo is less stringent than the prohibition against destroying the later embryo or fetus. Nevertheless, some defenders
of the argument from potential have invoked probability.
Among these has been the Roman Catholic theologian John
Noonan:
160 

As life itself is a matter of probabilities, as most moral reasoning
is an estimate of probabilities, so it seems in accord with the
structure of reality and the nature of moral thought to found a
moral judgment on the change in probabilities at conception...
Would the argument be different if only one out of ten children
conceived came to term? Of course this argument would be
different. This argument is an appeal to probabilities that actually
exist, not to any and all states of affairs which may be imagined
... If a spermatozoon is destroyed, one destroys a being which
had a chance of far less than 1 in 200 million of developing into
a reasoning being, possessed of the genetic code, a heart and
other organs, and capable of pain. If a fetus is destroyed, one
destroys a being already possessed of the genetic code, organs
and sensitivity to pain, and one which had an 80 per cent chance
of developing further into a baby outside the womb who, in
time, would reason.
The article from which this quotation is taken has been influential in the abortion debate, and has often been quoted and
reprinted by those opposed to abortion, but the development
of our understanding of the reproductive process has made
Noonan's position untenable. The initial difficulty is that Noonan's figures for embryo survival even in the uterus are no longer
regarded as accurate. At the time Noonan wrote, the estimate
of pregnancy loss was based on clinical recognition of pregnancies at six to eight weeks after fertilisation. At this stage, the
chance of losing the pregnancy through spontaneous abortion
is about 15%. Recent technical advances allowing earlier recognition of pregnancy, however, provide startlingly different
figures. If pregnancy is diagnosed before implantation (within
14 days of fertilisation) the probability of a birth resulting is 25
to 30%. Post-implantation this increases initially to 46 to 60%,
and it is not until six weeks gestation that the chance of birth
occurring increases to 85 to 90%.
Noonan claimed that his argument is 'an appeal to probabilities that actually exist, not to any and all states of affairs which
may be imagined'. But once we substitute the real probabilities
161 

of embryos, at various stages of their existence, becoming persons, Noonan's argument no longer supports the moment of
fertilisation as the time at which the embryo gains a significantly
different moral status. Indeed, if we were to require an 80%
probability of further development into a baby - the figure
Noonan himself mentions - we would have to wait until nearly
six weeks after fertilisation before the embryo would have the
significance Noonan wants to claim for it.
At one point in his argument Noonan refers to the number
of sperm involved in a male ejaculation, and says that there is
only one chance in 200,000,000 of a sperm becoming part of
a living being. This focus on the sperm rather than the egg is a
curious instance of male bias, but even if we let that pass, new
technology provides still one more difficulty for the argument.
There now exists a means of overcoming male infertility caused
by a low sperm count. The egg is removed as in the normal in
vitro procedure; but instead of adding a drop of seminal fluid
to the dish with the egg, a single sperm is picked up with a fine
needle and micro-injected under the outer layer of the egg. So
if we compare the probability of the embryo becoming a person
with the probability of the egg, together with the single sperm
that has been picked up by the needle and is about to be microinjected into the egg, becoming a person, we will be unable to
find any sharp distinction between the two. Does that mean
that it would be wrong to stop the procedure, once the sperm
has been picked up? Noonan's argument from probabilities
would seem to commit him either to this implausible claim, or
to accepting that we may destroy human embryos. This procedure also undermines Ramsey's claim about the importance
of the unique genetic blueprint - that '"never-to-be-repeated"
informational speck' having been determined in the case of the
embryo but not in the case of the egg and sperm. For that too
is here determined before fertilisation.
In this section I have tried to show how the special circum162 

stances of the embryo in the laboratory affect the application
of the arguments discussed elsewhere in this chapter about the
status of the embryo or fetus. I have not attempted to cover all
aspects of in vitro fertilisation and embryo experimentation. To
do that it would be necessary to investigate several other issues,
including the appropriateness of allocating scarce medical resources to this area at a time when the world has a serious
problem of overpopulation, and the speculation that the new
techniques will be misused to produce children 'made-to order',
either at the behest of parents or, worse still, of some mad
dictator. To cover these important but disparate matters would
take us too far from the main themes of this book. Brief mention
must, however, be made of one other aspect of embryo experimentation: the role of the couple from whose gametes the
embryo has developed.
Feminists have played a valuable role in pointing out how
vulnerable a couple may be to pressure from the medical team
to donate an embryo for research purposes. They may be desperate for a child. The IVF team represent their last hope of
achieving this goal. They know that there are many other couples seeking treatment. All this means that they are likely to be
prepared to go to great lengths in order to please the medical
team. When they are asked to donate eggs or embryos, can they
really make a free choice? Only, I think, if it is quite clear that
their answer will not affect their IVF treatment in any way.
Wherever experimentation on embryos is carried out, there is
a need to develop safeguards and forms of oversight to ensure
that this is always the case.
MAKING USE OF THE FETUS
The prospects of using human fetuses for medical purposes has
created a further controversial issue related to abortion. Research carried out specifically on fetuses has led to the hope of
163 

finding cures for many serious illnesses by the transplantation
of tissue or cells from the fetus. Compared with adult tissue,
fetal tissue appears to grow better after transplantation, and to
be less likely to be rejected by the patient. The example that
has received the most publicity to date is Parkinson's disease,
but the use of fetal tissue has also been suggested in the treatment of Alzheimer's Disease, Huntington's Disease, and diabetes; and fetal transplants have been used to save the life of
another fetus, in a case in which a 30 week old fetus, in utero,
suffering from a fatal immune system disorder was given fetal
cells from aborted fetuses.
Do fetuses have rights or interests that may be violated or
harmed by using them for these purposes? I have already argued
that the fetus has no right to, nor strictly speaking even an
interest in, life. But we have seen that, in the case of animals,
to say that a being has no right to life does not mean that the
being has no rights or interests at all. If the fetus is capable of
feeling pain, then, like animals, the fetus has an interest in not
suffering pain, and that interest should be given equal consideration with the similar interests of any other being. It is easy
to imagine that keeping a fetus alive after an abortion in order
to preserve the tissue of the fetus in the best possible condition
could cause pain and suffering to a fetus capable of feeling pain.
So we must now return to a more detailed investigation of a
topic touched upon earlier in this chapter: When does the fetus
become conscious?
Fortunately it is now possible to give a reasonably definite
answer to this question. The part of the brain associated with
sensations of pain, and more generally with consciousness, is
the cerebral cortex. Until 18 weeks of gestation, the cerebral
cortex is not sufficiently developed for synaptic connections to
take place within it - in other words, the signals that give rise
to pain in an adult are not being received. Between 18 and 25
weeks, the brain of the fetus reaches a stage at which there is
some nerve transmission in those parts associated with con164 

sciousness. Even then, however, the fetus appears to be in a
persistent state of sleep, and therefore may not be able to perceive pain. The fetus begins to 'wake up'at a gestational age of
around 30 weeks. This is, of course, well beyond the stage of
viability, and a 'fetus' that was alive and outside the womb at
this stage would be a premature baby, and not a fetus at all.
In order to give the fetus the benefit of the doubt, it would
be reasonable to take the earliest possible time at which the
fetus might be able to feel anything as the boundary after which
the fetus should be protected. Thus we should disregard the
uncertain evidence about wakefulness, and take as a more definite line, the time at which the brain is physically capable of
receiving signals necessary for awareness. This suggests a
boundary at 18 weeks of gestation. Prior to that time, there is
no good basis for believing that the fetus needs protection from
harmful research, because the fetus cannot be harmed. After
that time, the fetus does need protection from harm, on the
same basis as sentient, but not self-conscious, nonhuman animals need it.
There is, however, one qualification that must be added to
this statement. While the fetus prior to 18 weeks may, strictly
speaking, be unable to be harmed, if the fetus is allowed to
develop into a child, the future child could be very seriously
harmed by an experiment that caused the child to be born in
a disabled state. Therefore research that allows the fetus to survive beyond 18 weeks does not come under the permissive rule
suggested in the previous paragraph.
In discussions of the use of fetal tissue there is often mention
of the risk of 'complicity' in the immoral act of abortion. Those
wishing to defend the use of fetal tissue therefore go to great
lengths in order to show that the use of fetal tissue can be kept
entirely separate from the decision to carry out the abortion,
and so does not serve to 'legitimise' abortions. For the same
reason, many countries now have, or are developing, laws or
guidelines for the use of fetal tissue from induced abortions,
165 

and many of these laws or guidelines are drawn up on the basis
of the assumption, implicit or explicit, that it is important to
separate the decision for the abortion from the use of the fetal
tissue, lest the use of fetal tissue serve to increase the incidence
of abortions. There may be, for example, a requirement that the
donation has to be an entirely anonymous one. This prevents
a woman having an abortion in order to donate tissue that might
save the life of a relative, perhaps one of her existing children.
It is possible that the motivation for such requirements is to
protect the woman from pressure to have an abortion. Whether
that is a valid ground for requiring anonymity is something I
shall consider shortly. Here I wish only to point out that if it is
the premise that abortion is immoral that supplies the motive
for seeking to prevent any 'complicity' between the use of the
fetal tissue and the carrying out of the abortion, or to ensure
that fetal tissue use does not contribute to a higher incidence
of abortions, then the arguments presented in this chapter count
against that view. At least when carried out before 18 weeks,
abortion is in itself morally neutral. Even later abortions, when
some pain may be involved, could be justified if the outcome
were to prevent much greater suffering by saving the life of a
child suffering from an immune system disorder, or to cure
Parkinson's or Alzheimer's disease in an older person. If the
requirement that we separate the act of abortion from the donation of fetal tissue cannot be soundly based on the need to
protect the fetus, can it be founded instead on a need to protect
the parents, in particular the woman? Different aspects of this
separation need to be considered. If the doctor counselling the
pregnant woman about her abortion and the doctor seeking
fetal tissue for a dying patient are one and the same, the conflict
of interest is clear, and there seems a real risk that the doctor
will not be able to give disinterested advice to the pregnant
woman. So this separation is an important aspect of protecting
the position of the pregnant woman.
What, though, of the view that the pregnant woman must
166 

be separated from the recipient by a veil of anonymity? This,
of course, prevents her having an abortion in order to provide
tissue to someone she knows. Is this restriction justified by consideration of her own interests? On the one hand, without this
protection it is easy to imagine scenarios in which a pregnant
woman would find herself under great pressure to abort a pregnancy in order to save the life of a dying relative; or a woman
who is not pregnant might feel that she has to become pregnant
and then terminate the pregnancy to provide the needed fetal
tissue. Feminists may well feel that in a society in which men
are dominant, the prospects for further intensifying the oppression of women in this way is reason enough to exclude the
designation of tissue for a particular known person.
Yet the argument for the opposite conclusion is also strong.
It is neither unusual nor unreasonable for a parent to make
great sacrifices for a child. We allow both men and women to
work long hours doing meaningless factory labor in order to
save enough money to ensure that their children receive a good
education. This suggests that sacrifice for the sake of a relative
or loved one is not in itself wrong or something we need to
prohibit. In many countries, we also allow women to have
abortions for reasons that are far less important than the saving
of a life. This indicates that we do not regard an abortion as
something so bad (from the point of view of the fetus, or of the
woman) that it should be prohibited, or even restricted to situations in which it is necessary to save a life. If we accept the
assumptions that underly both these attitudes, we can scarcely
criticise a woman who decides to have an abortion in order to
provide fetal tissue that could save the life of her child. Not
every woman may want to do this, but those who do may well
be making a perfectly reasonable, autonomous decision. It is
highly paternalistic for the law to step in and say that a doctor
must not give effect to such decisions. From this perspective it
is odd that some feminists, whom one might expect to find
upholding the right of women to autonomy, should be among
167 

those who think that women need special laws to protect them
against the effects of their own freely chosen actions.
There is considerable force in both of these opposed arguments, but we should favour autonomy unless there is clear
evidence that the results of doing so are very bad indeed. I know
of no evidence to that effect. I suspect, in fact, that much (though
certainly not all) of the motivation for prohibiting designated
donations of tissue derives from a desire to avoid causing more
abortions, and in particular, to avoid women becoming pregnant in order to make fetal tissue available. But for the reasons
already given, I see nothing inherently wrong with more abortions, or with pregnancies being undertaken in order to provide
fetal tissue, as long as the women involved are freely choosing
to do this, and the additional abortions really do make some
contribution to saving the lives of others. If the chief objection
is that the women's actions might be coerced rather than freely
chosen, the solution would be not to prohibit all choices for
abortion to provide fetal tissue, but rather to set up procedures
to ensure that those who do this have chosen freely, in the light
of all the available relevant information.
At this point commerce is bound to rear its head. Someone
will ask: What if women become pregnant and terminate their
pregnancies not in order to save the lives of those they care
about, but because they will be paid for the fetal tissue? Do not
arguments from autonomy suggest that this, too, should be up
to the woman to decide? Is it really worse to become pregnant
and terminate the pregnancy in order to receive, say, $10,000
than to spend six months doing repetitious labour in a noisy,
polluted, hazardous factory for the same amount of money?
Despite my willingness to facilitate fetal tissue use, I am much
more reluctant to embrace the free market. This is not because
I think that women would be unable to protect themselves from
the exploitation of the market; it really does not seem to me a
worse form of exploitation than those that we accept in more
common forms of employment. Rather, I dislike the idea of a
168 

free market in fetal tissue because, as R.M. Titmuss argued many
years ago in the case of blood supplies for medical purposes,
when we choose between a social policy based on altruism and
one based on commerce, we are choosing between two different
types of society. It may well be better, for a variety of reasons,
that there are some things that money cannot buy; some circumstances in which we must rely on the altruism of those we
love, or even of strangers in our society. I support efforts to
resist the creeping commercialisation of every aspect of our lives,
and so I would resist the commercialisation of fetal tissue.
ABORTION AND INFANTICIDE
There remains one major objection to the argument I have
advanced in favour of abortion. We have already seen that the
strength of the conservative position lies in the difficulty liberals
have in pointing to a morally significant line of demarcation
between an embryo and a newborn baby. The standard liberal
position needs to be able to point to some such line, because
liberals usually hold that it is permissible to kill an embryo or
fetus but not a baby. I have argued that the life of a fetus (and
even more plainly, of an embryo) is of no greater value than
the life of a nonhuman animal at a similar level of rationality,
self-consciousness, awareness, capacity to feel, etc., and that
since no fetus is a person no fetus has the same claim to life as
a person. Now it must be admitted that these arguments apply
to the newborn baby as much as to the fetus. A week-old baby
is not a rational and self-conscious being, and there are many
nonhuman animals whose rationality, self-consciousness,
awareness, capacity to feel, and so on, exceed that of a human
baby a week or a month old. If the fetus does not have the same
claim to life as a person, it appears that the newborn baby does
not either, and the life of a newborn baby is of less value to it
than the life of a pig, a dog, or a chimpanzee is to the nonhuman
animal. Thus while my position on the status of fetal life may
169 

be acceptable to many, the implications of this position for the
status of newborn life are at odds with the virtually unchallenged assumption that the life of a newborn baby is as sacrosanct
as that of an adult. Indeed, some people seem to think that the
life of a baby is more precious than that of an adult. Lurid tales
of German soldiers bayoneting Belgian babies figured prominently in the wave of anti-German propaganda that accompanied Britain's entry into the First World War, and it seemed
to be tacitly assumed that this was a greater atrocity than the
murder of adults would be.
I do not regard the conflict between the position I have taken
and widely accepted views about the sanctity of infant life as a
ground for abandoning my position. These widely accepted
views need to be challenged. It is true that infants appeal to us
because they are small and helpless, and there are no doubt
very good evolutionary reasons why we should instinctively
feel protective towards them. It is also true that infants cannot
be combatants and killing infants in wartime is the clearest
possible case of killing civilians, which is prohibited by international convention. In general, since infants are harmless and
morally incapable of committing a crime, those who kill them
lack the excuses often offered for the killing of adults. None of
this shows, however, that the killing of an infant is as bad as
the killing of an (innocent) adult.
In thinking about this matter we should put aside feelings
based on the small, helpless, and - sometimes - cute appearance
of human infants. To think that the lives of infants are of special
value because infants are small and cute is on a par with thinking
that a baby seal, with its soft white fur coat and large round
eyes deserves greater protection than a gorilla, who lacks these
attributes. Nor can the helplessness or the innocence of the
infant Homo sapiens be a ground for preferring it to the equally
helpless and innocent fetal Homo sapiens, or, for that matter,
to laboratory rats who are 'innocent' in exactly the same sense
170 

as the human infant, and, in view of the experimenters' power
over them, almost as helpless.
If we can put aside these emotionally moving but strictly
irrelevant aspects of the killing of a baby we can see that the
grounds for not killing persons do not apply to newborn infants.
The indirect, classical utilitarian reason does not apply, because
no one capable of understanding what is happening when a
newborn baby is killed could feel threatened by a policy that
gave less protection to the newborn than to adults. In this respect
Bentham was right to describe infanticide as 'of a nature not to
give the slightest inquietude to the most timid imagination'.
Once we are old enough to comprehend the policy, we are too
old to be threatened by it.
Similarly, the preference utilitarian reason for respecting the
life of a person cannot apply to a newborn baby. Newborn babies
cannot see themselves as beings who might or might not have
a future, and so cannot have a desire to continue living. For the
same reason, if a right to life must be based on the capacity to
want to go on living, or on the ability to see oneself as a continuing mental subject, a newborn baby cannot have a right to
life. Finally, a newborn baby is not an autonomous being, capable of making choices, and so to kill a newborn baby cannot
violate the principle of respect for autonomy. In all this the
newborn baby is on the same footing as the fetus, and hence
fewer reasons exist against killing both babies and fetuses than
exist against killing those who are capable of seeing themselves
as distinct entities, existing over time.
It would, of course, be difficult to say at what age children
begin to see themselves as distinct entities existing over time.
Even when we talk with two and three year old children it
is usually very difficult to elicit any coherent conception of
death, or of the possibility that someone - let alone the child
herself - might cease to exist. No doubt children vary greatly
in the age at which they begin to understand these matters,
171 

as they do in most things. But a difficulty in drawing the line
is not a reason for drawing it in a place that is obviously
wrong, any more than the notorious difficulty in saying how
much hair a man has to have lost before we can call him
'bald' is a reason for saying that someone whose pate is as
smooth as a billiard ball is not bald. Of course, where rights
are at risk, we should err on the side of safety. There is some
plausibility in the view that, for legal purposes, since birth
provides the only sharp, clear and easily understood line, the
law of homicide should continue to apply immediately after
birth. Since this is an argument at the level of public policy
and the law, it is quite compatible with the view that, on
purely ethical grounds, the killing of a newborn infant is not
comparable with the killing of an older child or adult. Alternatively, recalling Hare's distinction between the critical and
intuitive levels of moral reasoning, one could hold that the
ethical judgment we have reached applies only at the level of
critical morality; for everyday decision-making, we should act
as if an infant has a right to life from the moment of birth.
In the next chapter, however, we shall consider another possibility: that there should be at least some circumstances in
which a full legal right to life comes into force not at birth,
but only a short time after birth - perhaps a month. This
would provide the ample safety margin mentioned above.
If these conclusions seem too shocking to take seriously, it
may be worth remembering that our present absolute protection of the lives of infants is a distinctively Christian attitude
rather than a universal ethical value. Infanticide has been
practised in societies ranging geographically from Tahiti to
Greenland and varying in culture from the nomadic Australian
aborigines to the sophisticated urban communities of ancient
Greece or mandarin China. In some of these societies infanticide was not merely permitted but, in certain circumstances,
deemed morally obligatory. Not to kill a deformed or sickly
infant was often regarded as wrong, and infanticide was prob172 

ably the first, and in several societies the only, form of population control.
We might think that we are just more 'civilised' than these
'primitive' peoples. But it is not easy to feel confident that we
are more civilised than the best Greek and Roman moralists. It
was not just the Spartans who exposed their infants on hillsides:
both Plato and Aristotle recommended the killing of deformed
infants. Romans like Seneca, whose compassionate moral sense
strikes the modern reader (or me, anyway) as superior to that
of the early and mediaeval Christian writers, also thought infanticide the natural and humane solution to the problem posed
by sick and deformed babies. The change in Western attitudes
to infanticide since Roman times is, like the doctrine of the
sanctity of human life of which it is a part, a product of Christianity. Perhaps it is now possible to think about these issues
without assuming the Christian moral framework that has, for
so long, prevented any fundamental reassessment.
None of this is meant to suggest that someone who goes
around randomly killing babies is morally on a par with a
woman who has an abortion. We should certainly put very
strict conditions on permissible infanticide; but these restrictions
might owe more to the effects of infanticide on others than to
the intrinsic wrongness of killing an infant. Obviously, in most
cases, to kill an infant is to inflict a terrible loss on those who
love and cherish the child. My comparison of abortion and
infanticide was prompted by the objection that the position I
have taken on abortion also justifies infanticide. I have admitted
this charge - without regarding the admission as fatal to my
position - to the extent that the intrinsic wrongness of killing
the late fetus and the intrinsic wrongness of killing the newborn
infant are not markedly different. In cases of abortion, however,
we assume that the people most affected - the parents-to-be,
or at least the mother-to-be - want to have the abortion. Thus
infanticide can only be equated with abortion when those closest to the child do not want it to live. As an infant can be adopted
173 

by others in a way that a pre-viable fetus cannot be, such cases
will be rare. (Some of them are discussed in the following chapter.) Killing an infant whose parents do not want it dead is, of
course, an utterly different matter.
174 
7
TAKING LIFE: HUMANS
I
N dealing with an objection to the view of abortion presented
in Chapter 6, we have already looked beyond abortion to
infanticide. In so doing we will have confirmed the suspicion
of supporters of the sanctity of human life that once abortion
is accepted, euthanasia lurks around the next corner - and for
them, euthanasia is an unequivocal evil. It has, they point out,
been rejected by doctors since the fifth century B.C., when physicians first took the Oath of Hippocrates and swore 'to give no
deadly medicine to anyone if asked, nor suggest any such counsel'. Moreover, they argue, the Nazi extermination programme
is a recent and terrible example of what can happen once we
give the state the power to kill innocent human beings.
I do not deny that if one accepts abortion on the grounds
provided in Chapter 6, the case for killing other human beings,
in certain circumstances, is strong. As I shall try to show in this
chapter, however, this is not something to be regarded with
horror, and the use of the Nazi analogy is utterly misleading.
On the contrary, once we abandon those doctrines about the
sanctity of human life that - as we saw in Chapter 4 - collapse
as soon as they are questioned, it is the refusal to accept killing
that, in some cases, is horrific.
'Euthanasia' means, according to the dictionary, 'a gentle and
easy death', but it is now used to refer to the killing of those
who are incurably ill and in great pain or distress, for the sake
of those killed, and in order to spare them further suffering or
distress. This is the main topic of this chapter. I shall also consider, however, some cases in which, though killing is not con175 

trary to the wishes of the human who is killed, it is also not
carried out specifically for the sake of that being. As we shall
see, some cases involving newborn infants fall into this category.
Such cases may not be 'euthanasia' within the strict meaning
of the term, but they can usefully be included within the same
general discussion, as long as we are clear about the relevant
differences.
Within the usual definition of euthanasia there are three different types, each of which raises distinctive ethical issues. It
will help our discussion if we begin by setting out this threefold
distinction and then assess the justifiability of each type.
TYPES OF EUTHANASIA
Voluntary Euthanasia
Most of the groups currently campaigning for changes in the
law to allow euthanasia are campaigning for voluntary euthanasia — that is, euthanasia carried out at the request of the person
killed.
Sometimes voluntary euthanasia is scarcely distinguishable
from assisted suicide. In Jean's Way, Derek Humphry has told
how his wife Jean, when dying of cancer, asked him to provide
her with the means to end her life swiftly and without pain.
They had seen the situation coming and discussed it beforehand.
Derek obtained some tablets and gave them to Jean, who took
them and died soon afterwards.
Dr Jack Kevorkian, a Michigan pathologist, went one step
further when he built a 'suicide machine' to help terminally ill
people commit suicide. His machine consisted of a metal pole
with three different bottles attached to a tube of the kind used
to provide an intravenous drip. The doctor inserts the tube in
the patient's vein, but at this stage only a harmless saline solution can pass through it. The patient may then flip a switch,
which will allow a coma-inducing drug to come through the
176 

tube; this is automatically followed by a lethal drug contained
in the third bottle. Dr Kevorkian announced that he was prepared to make the machine available to any terminally ill patient
w ho wished to use it. (Assisting suicide is not against the law
in Michigan.) In June 1990, Janet Adkins, who was suffering
from Alzheimer's disease, but still competent to make the decision to end her life, contacted Dr Kevorkian and told him of
her wish to die, rather than go through the slow and progressive
deterioration that the disease involves. Dr Kevorkian was in
attendance while she made use of his machine, and then reported Janet Adkins's death to the police. He was subsequently
charged with murder, but the judge refused to allow the charge
to proceed to trial, on the grounds that Janet Adkins had caused
her own death. The following year Dr Kevorkian made his
device available to two other people, who used it in order to
end their lives.1
In other cases, people wanting to die may be unable to kill
themselves. In 1973 George Zygmaniak was injured in a motorcycle accident near his home in New Jersey. He was taken
to hospital, where he was found to be totally paralysed from
the neck down. He was also in considerable pain. He told his
doctor and his brother, Lester, that he did not want to live in
this condition. He begged them both to kill him. Lester questioned the doctor and hospital staff about George's prospects of
recovery: he was told that they were nil. He then smuggled a
gun into the hospital, and said to his brother: 'I am here to end
your pain, George. Is it all right with you?' George, who was
now unable to speak because of an operation to assist his breathing, nodded affirmatively. Lester shot him through the temple.
The Zygmaniak case appears to be a clear instance of voluntary euthanasia, although without some of the procedural
1 Dr Kevorkian was again charged with murder, and with providing a prohibited substance, in connection with the latter two cases, but was once more
discharged.
177 

safeguards that advocates of the legalisation of voluntary euthanasia propose. For instance, medical opinions about the patient's prospects of recovery were obtained only in an informal
manner. Nor was there a careful attempt to establish, before
independent witnesses, that George's desire for death was of a
fixed and rational kind, based on the best available information
about his situation. The killing was not carried out by a doctor.
An injection would have been less distressing to others than
shooting. But these choices were not open to Lester Zygmaniak,
for the law in New Jersey, as in most other places, regards mercy
killing as murder, and if he had made his plans known, he
would not have been able to carry them out.
Euthanasia can be voluntary even if a person is not able, as
Jean Humphry, Janet Adkins, and George Zygmaniak were able,
to indicate the wish to die right up to the moment the tablets
are swallowed, the switch thrown, or the trigger pulled. A person may, while in good health, make a written request for
euthanasia if, through accident or illness, she should come to
be incapable of making or expressing a decision to die, in pain,
or without the use of her mental faculties, and there is no
reasonable hope of recovery. In killing a person who has made
such a request, who has re-affirmed it from time to time, and
who is now in one of the states described, one could truly claim
to be acting with her consent.
There is now one country in which doctors can openly help
their patients to die in a peaceful and dignified way. In the
Netherlands, a series of court cases during the 1980s upheld a
doctor's right to assist a patient to die, even if that assistance
amounted to giving the patient a lethal injection. Doctors in the
Netherlands who comply with certain guidelines (which will
be described later in this chapter) can now quite openly carry
out euthanasia and can report this on the death certificate without fear of prosecution. It has been estimated that about 2,300
deaths each year result from euthanasia carried out in this way.
178 

Involuntary Euthanasia
I shall regard euthanasia as involuntary when the person killed
is capable of consenting to her own death, but does not do so,
either because she is not asked, or because she is asked and
chooses to go on living. Admittedly this definition lumps two
different cases under one heading. There is a significant difference between killing someone who chooses to go on living and
killing someone who has not consented to being killed, but if
asked, would have consented. In practice, though, it is hard to
imagine cases in which a person is capable of consenting and
would have consented if asked, but was not asked. For why
not ask? Only in the most bizarre situations could one conceive
of a reason for not obtaining the consent of a person both able
and willing to consent.
Killing someone who has not consented to being killed can
properly be regarded as euthanasia only when the motive for
killing is the desire to prevent unbearable suffering on the part
of the person killed. It is, of course, odd that anyone acting from
this motive should disregard the wishes of the person for whose
sake the action is done. Genuine cases of involuntary euthanasia
appear to be very rare.
Non-voluntary Euthanasia
These two definitions leave room for a third kind of euthanasia.
If a human being is not capable of understanding the choice
between life and death, euthanasia would be neither voluntary
nor involuntary, but non-voluntary. Those unable to give consent would include incurably ill or severely disabled infants, and
people who through accident, illness, or old age have permanently lost the capacity to understand the issue involved, without having previously requested or rejected euthanasia in these
circumstances.
179 

Several cases of non-voluntary euthanasia have reached the
courts and the popular press. Here is one example. Louis Repouille had a son who was described as 'incurably imbecile',
had been bed-ridden since infancy and blind for five years.
According to Repouille: 'He was just like dead all the time He
couldn't walk, he couldn't talk, he couldn't do anything.' In
the end Repouille killed his son with chloroform.
In 1988 a case arose that well illustrates the way in which
modem medical technology forces us to make life and death
decisions. Samuel Linares, an infant, swallowed a small object
that stuck in his windpipe, causing a loss of oxygen to the brain.
He was admitted to a Chicago hospital in a coma and placed
on a respirator. Eight months later he was still comatose, still
on the respirator, and the hospital was planning to move Samuel
to a long-term care unit. Shortly before the move, Samuel's
parents visited him in the hospital. His mother left the room,
while his father produced a pistol and told the nurse to keep
away. He then disconnected Samuel from the respirator, and
cradled the baby in his arms until he died. When he was sure
Samuel was dead, he gave up his pistol and surrendered to
police. He was charged with murder, but the grand jury refused
to issue a homicide indictment, and he subsequently received
a suspended sentence on a minor charge arising from the use
of the pistol.
Obviously, such cases raise different issues from those raised
by voluntary euthanasia. There is no desire to die on the part
of the infant. It may also be questioned whether, in such cases,
the death is carried out for the sake of the infant, or for the sake
of the family as a whole. If Louis Repouille's son was 'just like
dead all the time', then he may have been so profoundly braindamaged that he was not capable of suffering at all. That is also
likely to have been true of the comatose Samuel Linares. In that
case, while caring for him would have been a great and no
doubt futile burden for the family, and in the Linares case, a
drain on the state's limited medical resources as well, the infants
180 

were not suffering, and death could not be said to be in, or
contrary to, their interests. It is therefore not euthanasia, strictly
speaking, as I have defined the term. It might nevertheless be
a justifiable ending of a human life.
Since cases of infanticide and non-voluntary euthanasia are
the kind of case most nearly akin to our previous discussions
of the status of animals and the human fetus, we shall consider
them first.
JUSTIFYING INFANTICIDE AND
NON-VOLUNTARY EUTHANASIA
As we have seen, euthanasia is non-voluntary when the subject has never had the capacity to choose to live or die. This is
the situation of the severely disabled infant or the older human being who has been profoundly intellectually disabled
since birth. Euthanasia or other forms of killing are also nonvoluntary when the subject is not now but once was capable
of making the crucial choice, and did not then express any
preference relevant to her present condition.
The case of someone who has never been capable of choosing
to live or die is a little more straightforward than that of a person
who had, but has now lost, the capacity to make such a decision.
We shall, once again, separate the two cases and take the more
straightforward one first. For simplicity, I shall concentrate on
infants, although everything I say about them would apply to
older children or adults whose mental age is and has always
been that of an infant.
Life and Death Decisions for Disabled Infants
If we were to approach the issue of life or death for a seriously
disabled human infant without any prior discussion of the ethics
181 

of killing in general, we might be unable to resolve the conflict
between the widely accepted obligation to protect the sanctity
of human life, and the goal of reducing suffering. Some say that
such decisions are 'subjective', or that life and death questions
must be left to God and Nature. Our previous discussions have,
however, prepared the ground, and the principles established
and applied in the preceding three chapters make the issue much
less baffling than most take it to be.
In Chapter 4 we saw that the fact that a being is a human
being, in the sense of a member of the species Homo sapiens,
is not relevant to the wrongness of killing it; it is, rather, characteristics like rationality, autonomy, and self-consciousness
that make a difference. Infants lack these characteristics. Killing
them, therefore, cannot be equated with killing normal human
beings, or any other self-conscious beings. This conclusion is
not limited to infants who, because of irreversible intellectual
disabilities, will never be rational, self-conscious beings. We saw
in our discussion of abortion that the potential of a fetus to
become a rational, self-conscious being cannot count against
killing it at a stage when it lacks these characteristics - not, that
is, unless we are also prepared to count the value of rational
self-conscious life as a reason against contraception and celibacy. No infant - disabled or not - has as strong a claim to life
as beings capable of seeing themselves as distinct entities, existing over time.
The difference between killing disabled and normal infants
lies not in any supposed right to life that the latter has and the
former lacks, but in other considerations about killing. Most
obviously there is the difference that often exists in the attitudes
of the parents. The birth of a child is usually a happy event for
the parents. They have, nowadays, often planned for the child.
The mother has carried it for nine months. From birth, a natural
affection begins to bind the parents to it. So one important
reason why it is normally a terrible thing to kill an infant is the
effect the killing will have on its parents.
182 

It is different when the infant is born with a serious disability.
Birth abnormalities vary, of course. Some are trivial and have
little effect on the child or its parents; but others turn the normally joyful event of birth into a threat to the happiness of the
parents, and any other children they may have.
Parents may, with good reason, regret that a disabled child
was ever born. In that event the effect that the death of the
child will have on its parents can be a reason for, rather than
against killing it. Some parents want even the most gravely
disabled infant to live as long as possible, and this desire would
then be a reason against killing the infant. But what if this is
not the case? In the discussion that follows I shall assume that
the parents do not want the disabled child to live. I shall also
assume that the disability is so serious that - again in contrast
to the situation of an unwanted but normal child today - there
are no other couples keen to adopt the infant. This is a realistic
assumption even in a society in which there is a long waitinglist of couples wishing to adopt normal babies. It is true that
from time to time cases of infants who are severely disabled and
are being allowed to die have reached the courts in a glare of
publicity, and this has led to couples offering to adopt the child.
Unfortunately such offers are the product of the highly publicised dramatic life-and-death situation, and do not extend to
the less publicised but far more common situations in which
parents feel themselves unable to look after a severely disabled
child, and the child then languishes in an institution.
Infants are sentient beings who are neither rational nor selfconscious. So if we turn to consider the infants in themselves,
independently of the attitudes of their parents, since their species
is not relevant to their moral status, the principles that govern
the wrongness of killing non-human animals who are sentient
but not rational or self-conscious must apply here too. As we
saw, the most plausible arguments for attributing a right to life
to a being apply only if there is some awareness of oneself as
a being existing over time, or as a continuing mental self. Nor
183 

can respect for autonomy apply where there is no capacity for
autonomy. The remaining principles identified in Chapter 4 are
utilitarian. Hence the quality of life that the infant can be expected to have is important.
One relatively common birth disability is a faulty development
of the spine known as spina bifida. Its prevalence varies in
different countries, but it can affect as many as one in five
hundred live births. In the more severe cases, the child will be
permanently paralysed from the waist down and lack control
of bowels or bladder. Often excess fluid accumulates in the
brain, a condition known as hydrocephalus, which can result
in intellectual disabilities. Though some forms of treatment exist,
if the child is badly affected at birth, the paralysis, incontinence,
and intellectual disability cannot be overcome.
Some doctors closely connected with children suffering from
severe spina bifida believe that the lives of the worst affected
children are so miserable that it is wrong to resort to surgery
to keep them alive. Published descriptions of the lives of these
children support the judgment that these worst affected children
will have lives filled with pain and discomfort. They need repeated major surgery to prevent curvature of the spine, due to
the paralysis, and to correct other abnormalities. Some children
with spina bifida have had forty major operations before they
reach their teenage years.
When the life of an infant will be so miserable as not to be
worth living, from the internal perspective of the being who
will lead that life, both the 'prior existence' and the 'total' version of utilitarianism entail that, if there are no 'extrinsic' reasons for keeping the infant alive - like the feelings 6f the parents
- it is better that the child should be helped to die without
further suffering. A more difficult problem arises - and the convergence between the two views ends - when we consider
disabilities that make the child's life prospects significantly less
promising than those of a normal child, but not so bleak as to
make the child's life not worth living. Haemophilia is probably
184 

in this category. The haemophiliac lacks the element in normal
blood that makes it clot and thus risks prolonged bleeding,
especially internal bleeding, from the slightest injury. If allowed
to continue, this bleeding leads to permanent crippling and
eventually death. The bleeding is very painful and although
improved treatments have eliminated the need for constant
blood transfusions, haemophiliacs still have to spend a lot of
time in hospital. They are unable to play most sports and live
constantly on the edge of crisis. Nevertheless, haemophiliacs do
not appear to spend their time wondering whether to end it
all; most find life definitely worth living, despite the difficulties
they face.
Given these facts, suppose that a newborn baby is diagnosed
as a haemophiliac. The parents, daunted by the prospect of
bringing up a child with this condition, are not anxious for him
to live. Could euthanasia be defended here? Our first reaction
may well be a firm 'no', for the infant can be expected to have
a life that is worth living, even if not quite as good as that of a
normal baby. The 'prior existence' version of utilitarianism supports this judgment. The infant exists. His life can be expected
to contain a positive balance of happiness over misery. To kill
him would deprive him of this positive balance of happiness.
Therefore it would be wrong.
On the 'total' version of utilitarianism, however, we cannot
reach a decision on the basis of this information alone. The total
view makes it necessary to ask whether the death of the haemophiliac infant would lead to the creation of another being
who would not otherwise have existed. In other words, if the
haemophiliac child is killed, will his parents have another child
whom they would not have if the haemophiliac child lives? If
they would, is the second child likely to have a better life than
the one killed?
Often it will be possible to answer both these questions affirmatively. A woman may plan to have two children. If one
dies while she is of child-bearing age, she may conceive another
185 

in its place. Suppose a woman planning to have two children
has one normal child, and then gives birth to a haemophiliac
child. The burden of caring for that child may make it impossible
for her to cope with a third child; but if the disabled child were
to die, she would have another. It is also plausible to suppose
that the prospects of a happy life are better for a normal child
than for a haemophiliac.
When the death of a disabled infant will lead to the birth of
another infant with better prospects of a happy life, the total
amount of happiness will be greater if the disabled infant is
killed. The loss of happy life for the first infant is outweighed
by the gain of a happier life for the second. Therefore, if killing
the haemophiliac infant has no adverse effect on others, it
would, according to the total view, be right to kill him.
The total view treats infants as replaceable, in much the same
way as it treats non-self-conscious animals (as we saw in Chapter 5). Many will think that the replaceability argument cannot
be applied to human infants. The direct killing of even the most
hopelessly disabled infant is still officially regarded as murder;
how then could the killing of infants with far less serious problems, like haemophilia, be accepted? Yet on further reflection,
the implications of the replaceability argument do not seem
quite so bizarre. For there are disabled members of our species
whom we now deal with exactly as the argument suggests we
should. These cases closely resemble the ones we have been
discussing. There is only one difference, and that is a difference
of timing - the timing of the discovery of the problem, and the
consequent killing of the disabled being.
Prenatal diagnosis is now a routine procedure for pregnant
women. There are various medical techniques for obtaining
information about the fetus during the early months of pregnancy. At one stage in the development of these procedures, it
was possible to discover the sex of the fetus, but not whether
the fetus would suffer from haemophilia. Haemophilia is a sexlinked genetic defect, from which only males suffer; females can
186 

carry the gene and pass it on to their male offspring without
themselves being affected. So a woman who knew that she
carried the gene for haemophilia could, at that stage, avoid
giving birth to a haemophiliac child only by finding out the sex
of the fetus, and aborting all males fetuses. Statistically, only
half of these male children of women who carried the defective
gene would have suffered from haemophilia, but there was then
no way to find out to which half a particular fetus belonged.
Therefore twice as many fetuses were being killed as necessary,
in order to avoid the birth of children with haemophilia. This
practice was widespread in many countries, and yet did not
cause any great outcry. Now that we have techniques for
identifying haemophilia before birth, we can be more selective,
but the principle is the same: women are offered, and usually
accept, abortions in order to avoid giving birth to children with
haemophilia.
The same can be said about some other conditions that can
be detected before birth. Down's syndrome, formerly known as
mongolism, is one of these. Children with this condition have
intellectual disabilities and most will never be able to live independently, but their lives, like those of small children, can be
joyful. The risk of having a Down's syndrome child increases
sharply with the age of the mother, and for this reason prenatal
diagnosis is routinely offered to pregnant women over 35.
Again, undergoing the procedure implies that if the test for
Down's syndrome is positive, the woman will consider aborting
the fetus and, if she still wishes to have another child, will start
another pregnancy, which has a good chance of being normal.
Prenatal diagnosis, followed by abortion in selected cases, is
common practice in countries with liberal abortion laws and
advanced medical techniques. I think this is as it should be. As
the arguments of Chapter 6 indicate, I believe that abortion can
be justified. Note, however, that neither haemophilia nor
Down's syndrome is so crippling as to make life not worth living,
from the inner perspective of the person with the condition. To
187 

abort a fetus with one of these disabilities, intending to have
another child who will not be disabled, is to treat fetuses as
interchangeable or replaceable. If the mother has previously
decided to have a certain number of children, say two, then
what she is doing, in effect, is rejecting one potential child in
favour of another. She could, in defence of her actions, say: the
loss of life of the aborted fetus is outweighed by the gain of a
better life for the normal child who will be conceived only if
the disabled one dies.
When death occurs before birth, replaceability does not conflict with generally accepted moral convictions. That a fetus is
known to be disabled is widely accepted as a ground for abortion. Yet in discussing abortion, we saw that birth does not
mark a morally significant dividing line. I cannot see how one
could defend the view that fetuses may be 'replaced' before
birth, but newborn infants may not be. Nor is there any other
point, such as viability, that does a better job of dividing the
fetus from the infant. Self-consciousness, which could provide
a basis for holding that it is wrong to kill one being and replace
it with another, is not to be found in either the fetus or the
newborn infant. Neither the fetus nor the newborn infant is an
individual capable of regarding itself as a distinct entity with a
life of its own to lead, and it is only for newborn infants, or for
still earlier stages of human life, that replaceability should be
considered to be an ethically acceptable option.
It may still be objected that to replace either a fetus or a
newborn infant is wrong because it suggests to disabled people
living today that their lives are less worth living than the lives
of people who are not disabled. Yet it is surely flying in the face
of reality to deny that, on average, this is so. That is the only
way to make sense of actions that we all take for granted. Recall
thalidomide: this drug, when taken by pregnant women, caused
many children to be born without arms or legs. Once the cause
of the abnormal births was discovered, the drug was taken off
the market, and the company responsible had to pay compen188 

sation. If we really believed that there is no reason to think of
the life of a disabled person as likely to be any worse than that
of a normal person, we would not have regarded this as a
tragedy. No compensation would have been sought, or awarded
by the courts. The children would merely have been 'different'.
We could even have left the drug on the market, so that women
who found it a useful sleeping pill during pregnancy could continue to take it. If this sounds grotesque, that is only because
we are all in no doubt at all that it is better to be born with
limbs than without them. To believe this involves no disrespect
at all for those who are lacking limbs; it simply recognises the
reality of the difficulties they face.
In any case, the position taken here does not imply that it
would be better that no people born with severe disabilities
should survive; it implies only that the parents of such infants
should be able to make this decision. Nor does this imply lack
of respect or equal consideration for people with disabilities who
are now living their own lives in accordance with their own
wishes. As we saw at the end of Chapter 2, the principle of
equal consideration of interests rejects any discounting of the
interests of people on grounds of disability.
Even those who reject abortion and the idea that the fetus is
replaceable are likely to regard possible people as replaceable.
Recall the second woman in Parfit's case of the two women,
described in Chapter 5. She was told by her doctor that if she
went ahead with her plan to become pregnant immediately,
her child would have a disability (it could have been haemophilia); but if she waited three months her child would not have
the disability. If we think she would do wrong not to wait, it
can only be because we are comparing the two possible lives
and judging one to have better prospects than the other. Of
course, at this stage no life has begun; but the question is, when
does a life, in the morally significant sense, really begin? In
Chapters 4 and 5 we saw several reasons for saying that life
only begins in the morally significant sense when there is aware189 

ness of one's existence over time. The metaphor of life as a
journey also provides a reason for holding that in infancy, life's
voyage has scarcely begun.
Regarding newborn infants as replaceable, as we now regard
fetuses, would have considerable advantages over prenatal diagnosis followed by abortion. Prenatal diagnosis still cannot
detect all major disabilities. Some disabilities, in fact, are not
present before birth; they may be the result of extremely premature birth, or of something going wrong in the birth process
itself. At present parents can choose to keep or destroy their
disabled offspring only if the disability happens to be detected
during pregnancy. There is no logical basis for restricting parents' choice to these particular disabilities. If disabled newborn
infants were not regarded as having a right to life until, say, a
week or a month after birth it would allow parents, in consultation with their doctors, to choose on the basis of far greater
knowledge of the infant's condition than is possible before birth.
All these remarks have been concerned with the wrongness
of ending the life of the infant, considered in itself rather than
for its effects on others. When we take effects on others into
account, the picture may alter. Obviously, to go through the
whole of pregnancy and labour, only to give birth to a child
who one decides should not live, would be a difficult, perhaps
heartbreaking, experience. For this reason many women would
prefer prenatal diagnosis and abortion rather than live birth with
the possibility of infanticide; but if the latter is not morally worse
than the former, this would seem to be a choice that the woman
herself should be allowed to make.
Another factor to take into account is the possibility of adoption. When there are more couples wishing to adopt than normal children available for adoption, a childless couple may be
prepared to adopt a haemophiliac. This would relieve the
mother of the burden of bringing up a haemophiliac child, and
enable her to have another child, if she wished. Then the replaceability argument could not justify infanticide, for bringing
190 

the other child into existence would not be dependent on the
death of the haemophiliac. The death of the haemophiliac would
then be a straightforward loss of a life of positive quality, not
outweighed by the creation of another being with a better life.
So the issue of ending life for disabled newborn infants is not
without complications, which we do not have the space to
discuss adequately. Nevertheless the main point is clear: killing
a disabled infant is not morally equivalent to killing a person.
Very often it is not wrong at all.
Other Non-voluntary Life and Death Decisions
In the preceding section we discussed justifiable killing for
beings who have never been capable of choosing to live or die.
Ending a life without consent may also be considered in the
case of those who were once persons capable of choosing to
live or die, but now, through accident or old age, have permanently lost this capacity, and did not, prior to losing it, express
any views about whether they wished to go on living in such
circumstances. These cases are not rare. Many hospitals care for
motor accident victims whose brains have been damaged beyond all possible recovery. They may survive, in a coma, or
perhaps barely conscious, for several years. In 1991, the Lancet
reported that Rita Greene, a nurse, had been a patient at D.C.
General Hospital in Washington for thirty-nine years without
knowing it. Now aged sixty-three, she had been in a vegetative
state since undergoing open heart surgery in 1952. The report
stated that at any given time, between 5,000 and 10,000 Americans are surviving in a vegetative state. In other developed
countries, where life-prolonging technology is not used so aggressively, there are far fewer long-term patients in this
condition.
In most respects, these human beings do not differ importantly from disabled infants. They are not self-conscious, rational, or autonomous, and so considerations of a right to life
191 

or of respecting autonomy do not apply. If they have no experiences at all, and can never have any again, their lives have
no intrinsic value. Their life's journey has come to an end. They
are biologically alive, but not biographically. (If this verdict
seems harsh, ask yourself whether there is anything to choose
between the following options: (a) instant death or (b) instant
coma, followed by death, without recovery, in ten years' time.
I can see no advantage in survival in a comatose state, if death
without recovery is certain.) The lives of those who are not in
a coma and are conscious but not self-conscious have value if
such beings experience more pleasure than pain, or have preferences that can be satisfied; but it is difficult to see the point
of keeping such human beings alive if their life is, on the whole,
miserable.
There is one important respect in which these cases differ
from disabled infants. In discussing infanticide in the final section of Chapter 6, I cited Bentham's comment that infanticide
need not 'give the slightest inquietude to the most timid imagination'. This is because those old enough to be aware of the
killing of disabled infants are necessarily outside the scope of
the policy. This cannot be said of euthanasia applied to those
who once were rational and self-conscious. So a possible objection to this form of euthanasia would be that it will lead to
insecurity and fear among those who are not now, but might
come to be, within its scope. For instance, elderly people, knowing that non-voluntary euthanasia is sometimes applied to senile
elderly patients, bedridden, suffering, and lacking the capacity
to accept or reject death, might fear that every injection or tablet
will be lethal. This fear might be quite irrational, but it would
be difficult to convince people of this, particularly if old age
really had affected their memory or powers of reasoning.
This objection might be met by a procedure allowing those
who do not wish to be subjected to non-voluntary euthanasia
under any circumstances to register their refusal. Perhaps this
192 

would suffice; but perhaps it would not provide enough reassurance. If not, non-voluntary euthanasia would be justifiable
only for those never capable of choosing to live or die.
JUSTIFYING VOLUNTARY EUTHANASIA
Under existing laws in most countries, people suffering unrelievable pain or distress from an incurable illness who beg their
doctors to end their lives are asking their doctors to risk a murder
charge. Although juries are extremely reluctant to convict in
cases of this kind the law is clear that neither the request, nor
the degree of suffering, nor the incurable condition of the person
killed, is a defence to a charge of murder. Advocates of voluntary
euthanasia propose that this law be changed so that a doctor
could legally act on a patient's desire to die without further
suffering. Doctors have been able to do this quite openly in the
Netherlands, as a result of a series of court decisions during the
1980s, as long as they comply with certain conditions. In Germany, doctors may provide a patient with the means to end her
life, but they may not administer the substance to her.
The case for voluntary euthanasia has some common ground
with the case for non-voluntary euthanasia, in that death is a
benefit for the one killed. The two kinds of euthanasia differ,
however, in that voluntary euthanasia involves the killing of a
person, a rational and self-conscious being and not a merely
conscious being. (To be strictly accurate it must be said that this
is not always so, because although only rational and self-conscious beings can consent to their own deaths, they may not be
rational and self-conscious at the time euthanasia is contemplated - the doctor may, for instance, be acting on a prior written
request for euthanasia if, through accident or illness, one's rational faculties should be irretrievably lost. For simplicity we
shall, henceforth, disregard this complication.)
We have seen that it is possible to justify ending the life of a
193 

human being who lacks the capacity to consent. We must now
ask in what way the ethical issues are different when the being
is capable of consenting, and does in fact consent.
Let us return to the general principles about killing proposed
in Chapter 4. I argued there that killing a self-conscious being
is a more serious matter than killing a merely conscious being.
I gave four distinct grounds on which this could be argued:
1 The classical utilitarian claim that since self-conscious beings
are capable of fearing their own death, killing them has worse
effects on others.
2 The preference utilitarian calculation that counts the thwarting
of the victim's desire to go on living as an important reason
against killing.
3 A theory of rights according to which to have a right one must
have the ability to desire that to which one has a right, so that
to have a right to life one must be able to desire one's own
continued existence.
4 Respect for the autonomous decisions of rational agents.
Now suppose we have a situation in which a person suffering
from a painful and incurable disease wishes to die. If the individual were not a person - not rational or self-conscious -
euthanasia would, as I have said, be justifiable. Do any of the
four grounds for holding that it is normally worse to kill a person
provide reasons against killing when the individual is a person
who wants to die?
The classical utilitarian objection does not apply to killing that
takes place only with the genuine consent of the person killed.
That people are killed under these conditions would have no
tendency to spread fear or insecurity, since we have no cause
to be fearful of being killed with our own genuine consent. If
we do not wish to be killed, we simply do not consent. In fact,
the argument from fear points in favour of voluntary euthanasia,
for if voluntary euthanasia is not permitted we may, with good
cause, be fearful that our deaths will be unnecessarily drawn
out and distressing. In the Netherlands, a nationwide study
commissioned by the government found that 'Many patients
194 

want an assurance that their doctor will assist them to die should
suffering become unbearable.' Often, having received this assurance, no persistent request for euthanasia eventuated. The
availability of euthanasia brought comfort without euthanasia
having to be provided.
Preference utilitarianism also points in favour of, not against,
voluntary euthanasia. Just as preference utilitarianism must
count a desire to go on living as a reason against killing, so it
must count a desire to die as a reason for killing.
Next, according to the theory of rights we have considered,
it is an essential feature of a right that one can waive one's
rights if one so chooses. I may have a right to privacy; but I
can, if I wish, film every detail of my daily life and invite the
neighbours to my home movies. Neighbours sufficiently intrigued to accept my invitation could do so without violating
my right to privacy, since the right has on this occasion been
waived. Similarly, to say that I have a right to life is not to say
that it would be wrong for my doctor to end my life, if she does
so at my request. In making this request I waive my right to
life.
Lastly, the principle of respect for autonomy tells us to allow
rational agents to live their own lives according to their own
autonomous decisions, free from coercion or interference; but
if rational agents should autonomously choose to die, then respect for autonomy will lead us to assist them to do as they
choose.
So, although there are reasons for thinking that killing a selfconscious being is normally worse than killing any other kind
of being, in the special case of voluntary euthanasia most of
these reasons count for euthanasia rather than against. Surprising as this result might at first seem, it really does no more
than reflect the fact that what is special about self-conscious
beings is that they can know that they exist over time and will,
unless they die, continue to exist. Normally this continued existence is fervently desired; when the foreseeable continued ex195 

istence is dreaded rather than desired however, the desire to die
may take the place of the normal desire to live, reversing the
reasons against killing based on the desire to live. Thus the case
for voluntary euthanasia is arguably much stronger than the
case for non-voluntary euthanasia.
Some opponents of the legalisation of voluntary euthanasia
might concede that all this follows, if we have a genuinely free
and rational decision to die: but, they add, we can never be
sure that a request to be killed is the result of a free and rational
decision. Will not the sick and elderly be pressured by their
relatives to end their lives quickly? Will it not be possible to
commit outright murder by pretending that a person has requested euthanasia? And even if there is no pressure of falsification, can anyone who is ill, suffering pain, and very probably
in a drugged and confused state of mind, make a rational decision about whether to live or die?
These questions raise technical difficulties for the legalisation
of voluntary euthanasia, rather than objections to the underlying ethical principles; but they are serious difficulties nonetheless. The guidelines developed by the courts in the Netherlands have sought to meet them by proposing that euthanasia is acceptable only if
• It is carried out by a physician.
• The patient has explicitly requested euthanasia in a manner
that leaves no doubt of the patient's desire to die.
• The patient's decision is well-informed, free, and durable.
• The patient has an irreversible condition causing protracted
physical or mental suffering that the patients finds unbearable.
• There is no reasonable alternative (reasonable from the patient's point of view) to alleviate the patient's suffering.
• The doctor has consulted another independent professional
who agrees with his or her judgment.
Euthanasia in these circumstances is strongly supported by the
Royal Dutch Medical Association, and by the general public in
the Netherlands. The guidelines make murder in the guise of
196 

euthanasia rather far-fetched, and there is no evidence of an
increase in the murder rate in the Netherlands.
It is often said, in debates about euthanasia, that doctors can
be mistaken. In rare instances patients diagnosed by two competent doctors as suffering from an incurable condition have
survived and enjoyed years of good health. Possibly the legalisation of voluntary euthanasia would, over the years, mean
the deaths of a few people who would otherwise have recovered
from their immediate illness and lived for some extra years. This
is not, however, the knockdown argument against euthanasia
that some imagine it to be. Against a very small number of
unnecessary deaths that might occur if euthanasia is legalised
we must place the very large amount of pain and distress that
will be suffered if euthanasia is not legalised, by patients who
really are terminally ill. Longer life is not such a supreme good
that it outweighs all other considerations. (If it were, there
would be many more effective ways of saving life - such as a
ban on smoking, or a reduction of speed limits to 40 kilometres
per hour - than prohibiting voluntary euthanasia.) The possibility that two doctors may make a mistake means that the
person who opts for euthanasia is deciding on the balance of
probabilities and giving up a very slight chance of survival in
order to avoid suffering that will almost certainly end in death.
This may be a perfectly rational choice. Probability is the guide
of life, and of death, too. Against this, some will reply that
improved care for the terminally ill has eliminated pain and
made voluntary euthanasia unnecessary. Elisabeth Kiibler-Ross,
whose On Death and Dying is perhaps the best-known book on
care for the dying, has claimed that none of her patients request
euthanasia. Given personal attention and the right medication,
she says, people come to accept their deaths and die peacefully
without pain.
Kiibler-Ross may be right. It may be possible, now, to eliminate pain. In almost all cases, it may even be possible to do it
in a way that leaves patients in possession of their rational
197 

faculties and free from vomiting, nausea, or other distressing
side-effects. Unfortunately only a minority of dying patients now
receive this kind of care. Nor is physical pain the only problem.
There can also be other distressing conditions, like bones so
fragile they fracture at sudden movements, uncontrollable nausea and vomiting, slow starvation due to a cancerous growth,
inability to control one's bowels or bladder, difficulty in breathing, and so on.
Dr Timothy Quill, a doctor from Rochester, New York, has
described how he prescribed barbiturate sleeping pills for 'Diane', a patient with a severe form of leukaemia, knowing that
she wanted the tablets in order to be able to end her life. Dr
Quill had known Diane for many years, and admired her courage in dealing with previous serious illnesses. In an article in
the New England Journal of Medicine, Dr Quill wrote:
It was extraordinarily important to Diane to maintain control of
herself and her own dignity during the time remaining to her.
When this was no longer possible, she clearly wanted to die. As
a former director of a hospice program, I know how to use pain
medicines to keep patients comfortable and lessen suffering. I
explained the philosophy of comfort care, which I strongly believe in. Although Diane understood and appreciated this, she
had known of people lingering in what was called relative comfort, and she wanted no part of it. When the time came, she
wanted to take her life in the least painful way possible. Knowing
of her desire for independence and her decision to stay in control,
I thought this request made perfect sense. .. . In our discussion
it became clear that preoccupation with her fear of a lingering
death would interfere with Diane's getting the most out of the
time she had left until she found a safe way to ensure her death.
Not all dying patients who wish to die are fortunate enough
to have a doctor like Timothy Quill. Betty Rollin has described,
in her moving book Last Wish, how her mother developed ovarian cancer that spread to other parts of her body. One morning
her mother said to her:
198 

I've had a wonderful life, but now it's over, or it should be. I'm
not afraid to die, but I am afraid of this illness, what it's doing
to me. . . . There's never any relief from it now. Nothing but
nausea and this pain. . . . There won't be any more chemotherapy. There's no treatment anymore. So what happens to me
now? I know what happens. I'll die slowly I don't want
that Who does it benefit if I die slowly? If it benefits my
children I'd be willing. But it's not going to do you any
good There's no point in a slow death, none. I've never liked
doing things with no point. I've got to end this.
Betty Rollin found it very difficult to help her mother to carry
out her desire: 'Physician after physician turned down our pleas
for help (How many pills? What kind?).' After her book about
her mother's death was published, she received hundreds of
letters, many from people, or close relatives of people, who had
tried to die, failed, and suffered even more. Many of these people
were denied help from doctors, because although suicide is legal
in most jurisdictions, assisted suicide is not.
Perhaps one day it will be possible to treat all terminally ill
and incurable patients in such a way that no one requests euthanasia and the subject becomes a non-issue; but this is now
just a Utopian ideal, and no reason at all to deny euthanasia to
those who must live and die in far less comfortable conditions.
It is, in any case, highly paternalistic to tell dying patients that
they are now so well looked after that they need not be offered
the option of euthanasia. It would be more in keeping with
respect for individual freedom and autonomy to legalise euthanasia and let patients decide whether their situation is
bearable.
Do these arguments for voluntary euthanasia perhaps give
too much weight to individual freedom and autonomy? After
all, we do not allow people free choices on matters like, for
instance, the taking of heroin. This is a restriction of freedom
but, in the view of many, one that can be justified on paternalistic grounds. If preventing people from becoming heroin
199 

addicts is justifiable paternalism, why isn't preventing people
from having themselves killed?
The question is a reasonable one, because respect for individual freedom can be carried too far. John Stuart Mill thought
that the state should never interfere with the individual except
to prevent harm to others. The individual's own good, Mill
thought, is not a proper reason for state intervention. But Mill
may have had too high an opinion of the rationality of a human
being. It may occasionally be right to prevent people from making choices that are obviously not rationally based and that we
can be sure they will later regret. The prohibition of voluntary
euthanasia cannot be justified on paternalistic grounds, however, for voluntary euthanasia is an act for which good reasons
exist. Voluntary euthanasia occurs only when, to the best of
medical knowledge, a person is suffering from an incurable and
painful or extremely distressing condition. In these circumstances one cannot say that to choose to die quickly is obviously
irrational. The strength of the case for voluntary euthanasia lies
in this combination of respect for the preferences, or autonomy,
of those who decide for euthanasia; and the clear rational basis
of the decision itself.
NOT JUSTIFYING INVOLUNTARY EUTHANASIA
Involuntary euthanasia resembles voluntary euthanasia in that
it involves the killing of those capable of consenting to their
own death. It differs in that they do not consent. This difference
is crucial, as the argument of the preceding section shows. All
the four reasons against killing self-conscious beings apply when
the person killed does not choose to die.
Would it ever be possible to justify involuntary euthanasia
on paternalistic grounds, to save someone extreme agony? It
might be possible to imagine a case in which the agony was so
great, and so certain, that the weight of utilitarian considerations
favouring euthanasia override all four reasons against killing
200 

self-conscious beings. Yet to make this decision one would have
to be confident that one can judge when a person's life is so
bad as to be not worth living, better than that person can judge
herself. It is not clear that we are ever justified in having much
confidence in our judgments about whether the life of another
person is, to that person, worth living. That the other person
wishes to go on living is good evidence that her life is worth
living. What better evidence could there be?
The only kind of case in which the paternalistic argument
is at all plausible is one in which the person to be killed
does not realise what agony she will suffer in future, and if
she is not killed now she will have to live through to the
very end. On these grounds one might kill a person who has
- though she does not yet realise it - fallen into the hands
of homicidal sadists who will torture her to death. These cases
are, fortunately, more commonly encountered in fiction than
reality.
If in real life we are unlikely ever to encounter a case of
justifiable involuntary euthanasia, then it may be best to dismiss
from our minds the fanciful cases in which one might imagine
defending it, and treat the rule against involuntary euthanasia
as, for all practical purposes, absolute. Here Hare's distinction
between critical and intuitive levels of moral reasoning (see
Chapter 4), is again relevant. The case described in the preceding
paragraph is one in which, if we were reasoning at the critical
level, we might consider involuntary euthanasia justifiable; but
at the intuitive level, the level of moral reasoning we apply in
our daily lives, we can simply say that euthanasia is only justifiable if those killed either
1 lack the ability to consent to death, because they lack the
capacity to understand the choice between their own continued existence or non-existence; or
2 have the capacity to choose between their own continued life
or death and to make an informed, voluntary, and settled
decision to die.
201 

ACTIVE AND PASSIVE EUTHANASIA
The conclusions we have reached in this chapter will shock a
large number of readers, for they violate one of the most fundamental tenets of Western ethics - the wrongness of killing
innocent human beings. I have already made one attempt to
show that my conclusions are, at least in the area of disabled
infants, a less radical departure from existing practice than one
might suppose. I pointed out that many societies allow a pregnant woman to kill a fetus at a late stage of pregnancy if there
is a significant risk of it being disabled; and since the line between a developed fetus and a newborn infant is not a crucial
moral divide, it is difficult to see why it is worse to kill a newborn
infant known to be disabled. In this section I shall argue that
there is another area of accepted medical practice that is not
intrinsically different from the practices that the arguments of
this chapter would allow.
I have already referred to the birth defect known as spina
bifida, in which the infant is born with an opening in the back,
exposing the spinal cord. Until 1957, most of these infants died
young, but in that year doctors began using a new kind of valve,
to drain off the excess fluid that otherwise accumulates in the
head with this condition. In some hospitals it then became
standard practice to make vigorous efforts to save every spina
bifida infant. The result was that few such infants died - but of
those who survived, many were severely disabled, with gross
paralysis, multiple deformities- of the legs and spine, and no
control of bowel or bladder. Intellectual disabilities were also
common. In short, the existence of these children caused great
difficulty for their families and was often a misery for the children themselves.
After studying the results of this policy of active treatment a
British doctor, John Lorber, proposed that instead of treating
all cases of spina bifida, only those who have the defect in a
mild form should be selected for treatment. (He proposed that
202 

the final decision should be up to the parents, but parents nearly
always accept the recommendations of the doctors.) This principle of selective treatment has now been widely accepted in
many countries and in Britain has been recognised as legitimate
by the Department of Health and Social Security. The result is
that fewer spina bifida children survive beyond infancy, but
those who do survive are, by and large, the ones whose physical
and mental disabilities are relatively minor.
The policy of selection, then, appears to be a desirable one:
but what happens to those disabled infants not selected for
treatment? Lorber does not disguise the fact that in these cases
the hope is that the infant will die soon and without suffering.
It is to achieve this objective that surgical operations and other
forms of active treatment are not undertaken, although pain
and discomfort are as far as possible relieved. If the infant happens to get an infection, the kind of infection that in a normal
infant would be swiftly cleared up with antibiotics, no antibiotics
are given. Since the survival of the infant is not desired, no steps
are taken to prevent a condition, easily curable by ordinary
medical techniques, proving fatal.
All this is, as I have said, accepted medical practice. In articles
in medical journals, doctors have described cases in which they
have allowed infants to die. These cases are not limited to spina
bifida, but include, for instance, babies born with Down's syndrome and other complications. In 1982, the 'Baby Doe' case
brought this practice to the attention of the American public.
'Baby Doe' was the legal pseudonym of a baby born in Bloomington, Indiana, with Down's syndrome and some additional
problems. The most serious of these was that the passage from
the mouth to the stomach - the oesophagus - was not properly
formed. This meant that Baby Doe could not receive nourishment by mouth. The problem could have been repaired by surgery - but in this case the parents, after discussing the situation
with their obstetrician, refused permission for surgery. Without
surgery, Baby Doe would soon die. Baby Doe's father later said
203 

that as a schoolteacher he had worked closely with Down's
syndrome children, and that he and his wife had decided that
it was in the best interests of Baby Doe, and of their family as
a whole (they had two other children), to refuse consent for
the operation. The hospital authorities, uncertain of their legal
position, took the matter to court. Both the local county court
and the Indiana State Supreme Court upheld the parents' right
to refuse consent to surgery. The case attracted national media
attention, and an attempt was made to take it to the U.S. Supreme Court, but before this could happen, Baby Doe died.
One result of the Baby Doe case was that the U.S. government,
headed at the time by President Ronald Reagan, who had come
to power with the backing of the right-wing religious 'Moral
Majority', issued a regulation directing that all infants are to be
given necessary life-saving treatment, irrespective of disability.
But the new regulations were strongly resisted by the American
Medical Association and the American Academy of Pediatrics.
In court hearings on the regulations, even Dr C. Everett Koop,
Reagan's surgeon-general and the driving force behind the attempt to ensure that all infants should be treated, had to admit
that there were some cases in which he would not provide lifesustaining treatment. Dr Koop mentioned three conditions in
which, he said, life-sustaining treatment was not appropriate:
anencephalic infants (infants born without a brain); infants who
had, usually as a result of extreme prematurity, suffered such
severe bleeding in the brain that they would never be able to
breathe without a respirator and would never be able even to
recognise another person; and infants lacking a major part of
their digestive tract, who could only be kept alive by means of
a drip providing nourishment directly into the bloodstream.
The regulations were eventually accepted only in a watereddown form, allowing some flexibility to doctors. Even so, a
subsequent survey of American paediatricians specialising in the
care of newborn infants showed that 76 percent thought that
the regulations were not necessary, 66 percent considered the
204 

regulations interfered with parents' right to determine what
course of action was in the best interests of their children, and
60 percent believed that the regulations did not allow adequate
consideration of infants' suffering.
In a series of British cases, the courts have accepted the view
that the quality of a child's life is a relevant consideration in
deciding whether life-sustaining treatment should be provided.
In a case called In re B, concerning a baby like Baby Doe, with
Down's syndrome and an intestinal obstruction, the court said
that surgery should be carried out, because the infant's life
would not be 'demonstrably awful'. In another case, Re C, where
the baby had a poorly formed brain combined with severe physical handicaps, the court authorised the paediatric team to refrain from giving life-prolonging treatment. This was also the
course taken in the case of Re Baby J: this infant was born
extremely prematurely, and was blind and deaf and would probably never have been able to speak.
Thus, though many would disagree with Baby Doe's parents
about allowing a Down's syndrome infant to die (because people with Down's syndrome can live enjoyable lives and be warm
and loving individuals), virtually everyone recognises that in
more severe conditions, allowing an infant to die is the only
humane and ethically acceptable course to take. The question
is: if it is right to allow infants to die, why is it wrong to kill
them?
This question has not escaped the notice of the doctors involved. Frequently they answer it by a pious reference to the
nineteenth-century poet, Arthur Clough, who wrote:
Thou shalt not kill; but need'st not strive
Officiously to keep alive.
Unfortunately for those who appeal to Clough's immortal
lines as an authoritative ethical pronouncement, they come
from a biting satire - 'The Latest Decalogue' - the intent of
205 

which is to mock the attitudes described. The opening lines, for
example, are:
Thou shalt have one god only; who
Would be at the expense of two.
No graven images may be
Worshipped except the currency.
So Clough cannot be numbered on the side of those who
think it wrong to kill, but right not to try too hard to keep alive.
Is there, nonetheless, something to be said for this idea? The
view that there is something to be said for it is often termed
'the acts and omissions doctrine'. It holds that there is an important moral distinction between performing an act that has
certain consequences - say, the death of a disabled child - and
omitting to do something that has the same consequences. If
this doctrine is correct, the doctor who gives the child a lethal
injection does wrong; the doctor who omits to give the child
antibiotics, knowing full well that without antibiotics the child
will die, does not.
What grounds are there for accepting the acts and omissions
doctrine? Few champion the doctrine for its own sake, as an
important ethical first principle. It is, rather, an implication of
one view of ethics, of a view that holds that as long as we do
not violate specified moral rules that place determinate moral
obligations upon us, we do all that morality demands of us.
These rules are of the kind made familiar by the Ten Commandments and similar moral codes: Do not kill, Do not lie,
Do not steal, and so on. Characteristically they are formulated
in the negative, so that to obey them it is necessary only to
abstain from the actions they prohibit. Hence obedience can be
demanded of every member of the community.
An ethic consisting of specific duties, prescribed by moral rules
that everyone can be expected to obey, must make a sharp moral
distinction between acts and omissions. Take, for example, the
rule: 'Do not kill.' If this rule is interpreted, as it has been in
206 

the Western tradition, as prohibiting only the taking of innocent
human life, it is not too difficult to avoid overt acts in violation
of it. Few of us are murderers. It is not so easy to avoid letting
innocent humans die. Many people die because of insufficient
food, or poor medical facilities. If we could assist some of them,
but do not do so, we are letting them die. Taking the rule against
killing to apply to omissions would make living in accordance
with it a mark of saintliness or moral heroism, rather than a
minimum required of every morally decent person.
An ethic that judges acts according to whether they do or do
not violate specific moral rules must, therefore, place moral
weight on the distinction between acts and omissions. An ethic
that judges acts by their consequences will not do so, for the
consequences of an act and an omission will often be, in all
significant respects, indistinguishable. For instance, omitting to
give antibiotics to a child with pneumonia may have consequences no less fatal than giving the child a lethal injection.
Which approach is right? I have argued for a consequentialist
approach to ethics. The acts/omissions issue poses the choice
between these two basic approaches in an unusually clear and
direct way. What we need to do is imagine two parallel situations differing only in that in one a person performs an act
resulting in the death of another human being, while in the
other she omits to do something, with the same result. Here is
a description of a relatively common situation, taken from an
essay by Sir Gustav Nossal, an eminent Australian medical
researcher:
An old lady of 83 has been admitted [to a nursing home for the
aged] because her increasing degree of mental confusion has
made it impossible for her to stay in her own home, and there
is no one willing and able to look after her. Over three years,
her condition deteriorates. She loses the ability to speak, requires
to be fed, and becomes incontinent. Finally, she cannot sit in an
armchair any longer, and is confined permanently to bed. One
day, she contracts pneumonia.
207 

In a patient who was enjoying a reasonable quality of life, pneumonia would be routinely treated with antibiotics. Should this
patient be given antibiotics? Nossal continues:
The relatives are contacted, and the matron of the nursing home
tells them that she and the doctor she uses most frequently have
worked out a loose arrangement for cases of this type. With
advanced senile dementia, they treat the first three infections
with antibiotics, and after that, mindful of the adage that 'pneumonia is the old person's friend', they let nature take its course.
The matron emphasises that if the relatives desire, all infections
can be vigorously treated. The relatives agree with the rule of
thumb. The patient dies of a urinary tract infection six months
later.
This patient died when she did as a result of a deliberate omission. Many people would think that this omission was welljustified. They might question whether it would not have been
better to omit treatment even for the initial occurrence of pneumonia. There is, after all, no moral magic about the number
three. Would it also have been justifiable, at the time of the
omission, to give an injection that would bring about the patient's death in a peaceful way?
Comparing these two possible ways of bringing about a patient's death at a particular time, is it reasonable to hold that
the doctor who gives the injection is a murderer who deserves
to go to jail, while the doctor who decides not to administer
antibiotics is practising good and compassionate medicine? That
may be what courts of law would say, but surely it is an untenable distinction. In both cases, the outcome is the death of
the patient. In both cases, the doctor knows that this will be
the result, and decides what she will do on the basis of this
knowledge, because she judges this result to be better than the
alternative. In both cases the doctor must take responsibility for
her decision - it would not be correct for the doctor who decided
not to provide antibiotics to say that she was not responsible
for the patient's death because she did nothing. Doing nothing
208 

in this situation is itself a deliberate choice and one cannot
escape responsibility for its consequences.
One might say, of course, that the doctor who withholds
antibiotics does not kill the patient, she merely allows the patient
to die; but one must then answer the further question why
killing is wrong, and letting die is not. The answer that most
advocates of the distinction give is simply that there is a moral
rule against killing innocent human beings and none against
allowing them to die. This answer treats a conventionally accepted moral rule as if it were beyond questioning; it does not
go on to ask whether we should have a moral rule against killing
(but not against allowing to die). But we have already seen that
the conventionally accepted principle of the sanctity of human
life is untenable. The moral rules that prohibit killing, but accept
'letting die' cannot be taken for granted either.
Reflecting on these cases leads us to the conclusion that there
is no intrinsic moral difference between killing and allowing to
die. That is, there is no difference which depends solely on the
distinction between an act and an omission. (This does not mean
that all cases of allowing to die are morally equivalent to killing.
Other factors - extrinsic factors - will sometimes be relevant.
This will be discussed further in Chapter 8.) Allowing to die -
sometimes called 'passive euthanasia' - is already accepted as
a humane and proper course of action in certain cases. If there
is no intrinsic moral difference between killing and allowing to
die, active euthanasia should also be accepted as humane and
proper in certain circumstances.
Others have suggested that the difference between withholding treatment necessary to prolong life, and giving a lethal injection, lies in the intention with which the two are done. Those
who take this view resort to the 'doctrine of double effect', a
doctrine widely held among Roman Catholic moral theologians
and moral philosophers, to argue that one action (for example,
refraining from life-sustaining treatment) may have two effects
(in this case, not causing additional suffering to the patient, and
209 

shortening the patient's life). They then argue that as long as
the directly intended effect is the beneficial one that does not
violate an absolute moral rule, the action is permissible. Though
we foresee that our action (or omission) will result in the death
of the patient, this is merely an unwanted side-effect. But the
distinction between directly intended effect and side-effect is a
contrived one. We cannot avoid responsibility simply by directing our intention to one effect rather than another. If we
foresee both effects, we must take responsibility for the foreseen
effects of what we do. We often want to do something, but
cannot do it because of its other, unwanted consequences. For
example, a chemical company might want to get rid of toxic
waste in the most economical manner, by dumping it in the
nearest river. Would we allow the executives of the company
to say that all they directly intended was to improve the efficiency of the factory, thus promoting employment and keeping
down the cost of living? Would we regard the pollution as
excusable because it is merely an unwanted side-effect of furthering these worthy objectives?
Obviously the defenders of the doctrine of double effect would
not accept such an excuse. In rejecting it, however, they would
have to rely upon a judgment that the cost - the polluted river
- is disproportionate to the gains. Here a consequentialist judgment lurks behind the doctrine of double effect. The same is
true when the doctrine is used in medical care. Normally, saving
life takes precedence over relieving pain. If in the case of a
particular patient it does not, this can only be because we have
judged that the patient's prospects for a future life of acceptable
quality are so poor that in this case relieving suffering can take
precedence. This is, in other words, not a decision based on
acceptance of the sanctity of human life, but a decision based
on a disguised quality of life judgment.
Equally unsatisfactory is the common appeal to a distinction
between 'ordinary' and 'extraordinary' means of treatment,
coupled with the belief that it is not obligatory to provide ex210 

traordinary means. Together with my colleague, Helga Kuhse,
I carried out a survey of paediatricians and obstetricians in Australia and found that they had remarkable ideas about what
constituted 'ordinary' and what 'extraordinary' means. Some
even thought that the use of antibiotics - the cheapest, simplest,
and most common medical procedure - could be extraordinary.
The reason for this range of views is easy to find. When one
looks at the justifications given by moral theologians and philosophers for the distinction, it turns out that what is 'ordinary'
in one situation can become 'extraordinary' in another. For
example, in the famous case of Karen Ann Quinlan, the young
New Jersey woman who was in a coma for ten years before
she died, a Roman Catholic bishop testified that the use of a
respirator was 'extraordinary' and hence optional because Quinlan had no hope of recovery from the coma. Obviously, if doctors
had thought that Quinlan was likely to recover, the use of the
respirator would not have been optional, and would have been
declared 'ordinary'. Again, it is the quality of life of the patient
(and where resources are limited and could be used more effectively to save lives elsewhere, the cost of the treatment) that
is determining whether a given form of treatment is ordinary
or extraordinary, and therefore is to be provided or not. Those
who appeal to this distinction are cloaking their consequentialist
views in the robe of an absolutist ethic; but the robe is worn
out, and the disguise is now transparent.
So it is not possible to appeal to either the doctrine of double
effect or the distinction between ordinary and extraordinary
means in order to show that allowing a patient to die is morally
different from actively helping a patient to die. Indeed, because
of extrinsic differences - especially differences in the time it
takes for death to occur - active euthanasia may be the only
humane and morally proper course. Passive euthanasia can be
a slow process. In an article in the British Medical Journal, John
Lorber has charted the fate of twenty-five infants born with
spina bifida on whom it had been decided, in view of the poor
211 

prospects for a worthwhile life, not to operate. It will be recalled
that Lorber freely grants that the object of not treating infants
is that they should die soon and painlessly. Yet of the twentyfive untreated infants, fourteen were still alive after one month,
and seven after three months. In Lorber's sample, all the infants
died within nine months, but this cannot be guaranteed, or at
least, cannot be guaranteed without stepping over the fine line
between active and passive euthanasia. (Lorber's opponents
have claimed that the untreated infants under his care all die
because they are given sedatives and fed only on demand. Sleepy
babies do not have healthy appetites.) An Australian clinic following Lorber's approach to spina bifida found that of seventynine untreated infants, five survived for more than two years.
For both the infants, and their families, this must be a longdrawn out ordeal. It is also (although in a society with a reasonable level of affluence this should not be the primary consideration) a considerable burden on the hospital staff and the
community's medical resources.
Consider, to take another example, infants born with Down's
syndrome and a blockage in the digestive system which, if not
removed, will make it impossible for the baby to eat. Like 'Baby
Doe', these infants may be allowed to die. Yet the blockage can
be removed and has nothing to do with the degree of intellectual
disability the child will have. Moreover, the death resulting from
the failure to operate in these circumstances is, though sure,
neither swift nor painless. The infant dies from dehydration or
hunger. Baby Doe took about five days to die, and in other
recorded instances of this practice, it has taken up to two weeks
for death to come.
It is interesting, in this context, to think again of our earlier
argument that membership of the species Homo sapiens does
not entitle a being to better treatment than a being at a similar
mental level who is a member of a different species. We could
also have said - except that it seemed too obvious to need saying
- that membership of the species Homo sapiens is not a reason
212 

for giving a being worse treatment than a member of a different
species. Yet in respect of euthanasia, this needs to be said. We
do not doubt that it is right to shoot badly injured or sick animals
if they are in pain and their chances of recovery are negligible.
To 'allow nature to take its course', withholding treatment but
refusing to kill, would obviously be wrong. It is only our misplaced respect for the doctrine of the sanctity of human life that
prevents us from seeing that what it is obviously wrong to do
to a horse, it is equally wrong to do to a disabled infant.
To summarise: passive ways of ending life result in a drawnout death. They introduce irrelevant factors (a blockage in the
intestine, or an easily curable infection) into the selection of
those who shall die. If we are able to admit that our objective
is a swift and painless death we should not leave it up to chance
to determine whether this objective is achieved. Having chosen
death we should ensure that it comes in the best possible way.
THE SLIPPERY SLOPE: FROM EUTHANASIA
TO GENOCIDE?
Before we leave this topic we must consider an objection that
looms so large in the anti-euthanasia literature that it merits a
section to itself. It is, for instance, the reason why John Lorber
rejects active euthanasia. Lorber has written:
I wholly disagree with euthanasia. Though it is fully logical, and
in expert and conscientious hands it could be the most humane
way of dealing with such a situation, legalizing euthanasia would
be a most dangerous weapon in the hands of the State or ignorant
or unscrupulous individuals. One does not have to go far back
in history to know what crimes can be committed if euthanasia
were legalized.
Would euthanasia be the first step down a slippery slope? In
the absence of prominent moral footholds to check our descent,
would we slide all the way down into the abyss of state terror
and mass murder? The experience of Nazism, to which Lorber
213 

no doubt is referring, has often been used as an illustration of
what could follow acceptance of euthanasia. Here is a more
specific example, from an article by another doctor, Leo
Alexander:
Whatever proportions [Nazi] crimes finally assumed, it became
evident to all who investigated them that they had started from
small beginnings. The beginnings at first were merely a subtle
shift in emphasis in the basic attitude of the physicians. It started
with the acceptance of the attitude, basic in the euthanasia movement, that there is such a thing as life not worthy to be lived.
This attitude in its early stages concerned itself merely with the
severely and chronically sick. Gradually the sphere of those to
be included in the category was enlarged to encompass the socially unproductive, the ideologically unwanted, the racially unwanted and finally all non-Germans. But it is important to realize
that the infinitely small wedged-in lever from which this entire
ttend of mind received its impetus was the attitude toward the
nonrehabilitable sick.
Alexander singles out the Nazis' so-called euthanasia program
as the root of all the horrendous crimes the Nazis later committed, because that program implied 'that there is such a thing
as life not worthy to be lived'. Lorber could hardly agree with
Alexander on this, since his recommended procedure of not
treating selected infants is based on exactly this judgment. Although people sometimes talk as if we should never judge a
human life to be not worth living, there are times when such
a judgment is obviously correct. A life of physical suffering,
unredeemed by any form of pleasure or by a minimal level of
self-consciousness, is not worth living. Surveys undertaken by
health care economists in which people are asked how much
they value being alive in certain states of health, regularly find
that people give some states a negative value - that is, they
indicate that they would prefer to be dead than to survive in
that condition. Apparently, the life of the elderly woman described by Sir Gustav Nossal was, in the opinion of the matron
of the nursing home, the doctor, and the relatives, not worth
214 

living. If we can set criteria for deciding who is to be allowed
to die and who is to be given treatment, then why should it be
wrong to set criteria, perhaps the same criteria, for deciding
w ho should be killed?
So it is not the attitude that some lives are not worth living
that marks out the Nazis from normal people who do not commit mass murder. What then is it? Is it that they went beyond
passive euthanasia, and practised active euthanasia? Many,
like Lorber, worry about the power that a program of active
euthanasia could place in the hands of an unscrupulous government. This worry is not negligible, but should not be
exaggerated. Unscrupulous governments already have within
their power more plausible means of getting rid of their opponents than euthanasia administered by doctors on medical
grounds. 'Suicides' can be arranged. 'Accidents' can occur. If
necessary, assassins can be hired. Our best defence against such
possibilities is to do everything possible to keep our government
democratic, open, and in the hands of people who would not
seriously wish to kill their opponents. Once the wish is serious
enough, governments will find a way, whether euthanasia is
legal or not.
In fact the Nazis did not have a euthanasia program, in the
proper sense of the word. Their so-called euthanasia program
was not motivated by concern for the suffering of those killed.
If it had been, why would the Nazis have kept their operations
secret, deceived relatives about the cause of death of those killed,
and exempted from the program certain privileged classes, such
as veterans of the armed services, or relatives of the euthanasia
staff? Nazi 'euthanasia' was never voluntary, and often was
involuntary rather than non-voluntary. 'Doing away with useless mouths' - a phrase used by those in charge - gives a better
idea of the objectives of the program than 'mercy-killing'. Both
racial origin and ability to work were among the factors considered in the selection of patients to be killed. It was the Nazi
belief in the importance of maintaining a pure Aryan Volk - a
215 

somewhat mystical entity that was thought of as more important
than mere individuals lives - that made both the so-called euthanasia program and later the entire holocaust possible. Proposals for the legalisation of euthanasia, in contrast, are based
on respect for autonomy and the goal of avoiding pointless
suffering.
This essential difference in the aims of Nazi 'euthanasia' and
modern proposals may be granted, but the slippery slope argument could still be defended as a way of suggesting that the
present strict rule against the direct killing of innocent human
beings serves a useful purpose. However arbitrary and unjustifiable the distinctions between human and non-human, fetus
and infant, killing and allowing to die may be, the rule against
direct killing of innocent humans at least marks a workable line.
The distinction between an infant whose life may be worth
living, and one whose life definitely is not, is much more difficult
to draw. Perhaps people who see that certain kinds of human
beings are killed in certain circumstances may go on to conclude
that it is not wrong to kill others not very different from the
first kind. So will the boundary of acceptable killing be pushed
gradually back? In the absence of any logical stopping place,
will the outcome be the loss of all respect for human life?
If our laws were altered so that anyone could carry out an
act of euthanasia, the absence of a clear line between those who
might justifiably be killed and those who might not would pose
a real danger; but that is not what advocates of euthanasia
propose. If acts of euthanasia could only be carried out by a
member of the medical profession, with the concurrence of a
second doctor, it is not likely that the propensity to kill would
spread unchecked throughout the community. Doctors already
have a good deal of power over life and death, through their
ability to withhold treatment. There has been no suggestion that
doctors who begin by allowing severely disabled infants to die
from pneumonia will move on to withhold antibiotics from
racial minorities or political extremists. In fact legalising eu216 

thanasia might well act as a check on the power of doctors since
it would bring into the open and under the scrutiny of another
doctor what some doctors now do on their own initiative and
in secret.
There is, anyway, little historical evidence to suggest that a
permissive attitude towards the killing of one category of human
beings leads to a breakdown of restrictions against killing other
humans. Ancient Greeks regularly killed or exposed infants, but
appear to have been at least as scrupulous about taking the lives
of their fellow-citizens as medieval Christians or modern Americans. In traditional Eskimo societies it was the custom for a
m an to kill his elderly parents, but the murder of a normal
healthy adult was almost unheard of. I mention these practices
not to suggest that they should be imitated, but only to indicate
that lines can be drawn at places different from where we now
draw them. If these societies could separate human beings into
different categories without transferring their attitudes from one
group to another, we with our more sophisticated legal systems
and greater medical knowledge should be able to do the same.
All of this is not to deny that departing from the traditional
sanctity-of-life ethic carries with it a very small but nevertheless
finite risk of unwanted consequences. Against this risk we must
balance the tangible harm to which the traditional ethic gives
rise - harm to those whose misery is needlessly prolonged. We
must also ask if the widespread acceptance of abortion and
passive euthanasia has not already revealed flaws in the traditional ethic that make it a weak defence against those who
lack respect for individual lives. A sounder, if less clear-cut,
ethic may in the long run provide a firmer ground for resisting
unjustifiable killing.
217 
7
RICH AND POOR
SOME FACTS ABOUT POVERTY
I
N the discussion of euthanasia in Chapter 7, we questioned
the distinction between killing and allowing to die, concluding that it is of no intrinsic ethical significance. This conclusion has implications that go far beyond euthanasia.
Consider these facts: by the most cautious estimates, 400
million people lack the calories, protein, vitamins and minerals
needed to sustain their bodies and minds in a healthy state.
Millions are constantly hungry; others suffer from deficiency
diseases and from infections they would be able to resist on a
better diet. Children are the worst affected. According to one
study, 14 million children under five die every year from the
combined effects of malnutrition and infection. In some districts
half the children bom can be expected to die before their fifth
birthday.
Nor is lack of food the only hardship of the poor. To give a
broader picture, Robert McNamara, when president of the
World Bank, suggested the term 'absolute poverty'. The poverty
we are familiar with in industrialised nations is relative poverty
- meaning that some citizens are poor, relative to the wealth
enjoyed by their neighbours. People living in relative poverty
in Australia might be quite comfortably off by comparison with
pensioners in Britain, and British pensioners are not poor in
comparison with the poverty that exists in Mali or Ethiopia.
Absolute poverty, on the other hand, is poverty by any standard.
In McNamara's words:
218 

Poverty at the absolute level... is life at the very margin of existence. The absolute poor are severely deprived human beings
struggling to survive in a set of squalid and degraded circumstances almost beyond the power of our sophisticated imaginations and privileged circumstances to conceive.
Compared to those fortunate enough to live in developed countries, individuals in the poorest nations have:
An infant mortality rate eight times higher
A life expectancy one-third lower
An adult literacy rate 60 per cent less
A nutritional level, for one out of every two in the population,
below acceptable standards;
And for millions of infants, less protein than is sufficient to permit
optimum development of the brain.
McNamara has summed up absolute poverty as 'a condition of
life so characterised by malnutrition, illiteracy, disease, squalid
surroundings, high infant mortality and low life expectancy as
to be beneath any reasonable definition of human decency'.
Absolute poverty is, as McNamara has said, responsible for
the loss of countless lives, especially among infants and young
children. When absolute poverty does not cause death, it still
causes misery of a kind not often seen in the affluent nations.
Malnutrition in young children stunts both physical and mental
development. According to the United Nations Development
Programme, 180 million children under the age of five suffer
from serious malnutrition. Millions of people on poor diets suffer from deficiency diseases, like goitre, or blindness caused by
a lack of vitamin A. The food value of what the poor eat is
further reduced by parasites such as hookworm and ringworm,
which are endemic in conditions of poor sanitation and health
education.
Death and disease apart, absolute poverty remains a miserable
condition of life, with inadequate food, shelter, clothing, sanitation, health services and education. The Worldwatch Institute
219 

estimates that as many as 1.2 billion people - or 23 per cent of
the world's population - live in absolute poverty. For the purposes of this estimate, absolute poverty is defined as "the lack
of sufficient income in cash or kind to meet the most basic
biological needs for food, clothing, and shelter." Absolute poverty is probably the principal cause of human misery today.
SOME FACTS ABOUT WEALTH
This is the background situation, the situation that prevails
on our planet all the time. It does not make headlines. People
died from malnutrition and related diseases yesterday, and
more will die tomorrow. The occasional droughts, cyclones,
earthquakes, and floods that take the lives of tens of thousands
in one place and at one time are more newsworthy. They add
greatly to the total amount of human suffering; but it is wrong
to assume that when there are no major calamities reported,
all is well.
The problem is not that the world cannot produce enough to
feed and shelter its people. People in the poor countries consume, on average, 180 kilos of grain a year, while North Americans average around 900 kilos. The difference is caused by the
fact that in the rich countries we feed most of our grain to
animals, converting it into meat, milk, and eggs. Because this
is a highly inefficient process, people in rich countries are responsible for the consumption of far more food than those in
poor countries who eat few animal products. If we stopped
feeding animals on grains and soybeans, the amount of food
saved would - if distributed to those who need it - be more
than enough to end hunger throughout the world.
These facts about animal food do not mean that we can easily
solve the world food problem by cutting down on animal products, but they show that the problem is essentially one of distribution rather than production. The world does produce
enough food. Moreover, the poorer nations themselves could
220 

produce far more if they made more use of improved agricultural
techniques.
So why are people hungry? Poor people cannot afford to buy
grain grown by farmers in the richer nations. Poor farmers cannot afford to buy improved seeds, or fertilisers, or the machinery
needed for drilling wells and pumping water. Only by transferring some of the wealth of the rich nations to the poor can
the situation be changed.
That this wealth exists is clear. Against the picture of absolute
poverty that McNamara has painted, one might pose a picture
of 'absolute affluence'. Those who are absolutely affluent are
not necessarily affluent by comparison with their neighbours,
but they are affluent by any reasonable definition of human
needs. This means that they have more income than they need
to provide themselves adequately with all the basic necessities
of life. After buying (either directly or through their taxes) food,
shelter, clothing, basic health services, and education, the absolutely affluent are still able to spend money on luxuries. The
absolutely affluent choose their food for the pleasures of the
palate, not to stop hunger; they buy new clothes to look good,
not to keep warm; they move house to be in a better neighbourhood or have a playroom for the children, not to keep out
the rain; and after all this there is still money to spend on stereo
systems, video-cameras, and overseas holidays.
At this stage I am making no ethical judgments about absolute
affluence, merely pointing out that it exists. Its defining characteristic is a significant amount of income above the level necessary to provide for the basic human needs of oneself and one's
dependents. By this standard, the majority of citizens of Western
Europe, North America, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and the
oil-rich Middle Eastern states are all absolutely affluent. To
quote McNamara once more:
The average citizen of a developed country enjoys wealth beyond
the wildest dreams of the one billion people in countries with
221 

per capita incomes under $200.' These, therefore, are the countries - and individuals - who have wealth that they could, without threatening their own basic welfare, transfer to the absolutely
poor.
At present, very little is being transferred. Only Sweden, the
Netherlands, Norway, and some of the oil-exporting Arab states
have reached the modest target, set by the United Nations, of
0.7 per cent of gross national product (GNP). Britain gives 0.31
per cent of its GNP in official development assistance and a
small additional amount in unofficial aid from voluntary organisations. The total comes to about £2 per month per person,
and compares with 5.5 per cent of GNP spent on alcohol, and
3 per cent on tobacco. Other, even wealthier nations, give little
more: Germany gives 0.41 per cent and Japan 0.32 per cent.
The United States gives a mere 0.15 per cent of its GNP.
THE MORAL EQUIVALENT OF MURDER?
If these are the facts, we cannot avoid concluding that by not
giving more than we do, people in rich countries are allowing
those in poor countries to suffer from absolute poverty, with
consequent malnutrition, ill health, and death. This is not a
conclusion that applies only to governments. It applies to each
absolutely affluent individual, for each of us has the opportunity
to do something about the situation; for instance, to give our
time or money to voluntary organisations like Oxfam, Care,
War on Want, Freedom from Hunger, Community Aid Abroad,
and so on. If, then, allowing someone to die is not intrinsically
different from killing someone, it would seem that we are all
murderers.
Is this verdict too harsh? Many will reject it as self-evidently
absurd. They would sooner take it as showing that allowing to
die cannot be equivalent to killing than as showing that living
in an affluent style without contributing to an overseas aid
agency is ethically equivalent to going over to Ethiopia and
222 

shooting a few peasants. And no doubt, put as bluntly as that,
the verdict is too harsh.
There are several significant differences between spending
money on luxuries instead of using it to save lives, and deliberately shooting people.
First, the motivation will normally be different. Those who
deliberately shoot others go out of their way to kill; they presumably want their victims dead, from malice, sadism, or some
equally unpleasant motive. A person who buys a new stereo
system presumably wants to enhance her enjoyment of music
- not in itself a terrible thing. At worst, spending money on
luxuries instead of giving it away indicates selfishness and indifference to the sufferings of others, characteristics that may
be undesirable but are not comparable with actual malice or
similar motives.
Second, it is not difficult for most of us to act in accordance
with a rule against killing people: it is, on the other hand, very
difficult to obey a rule that commands us to save all the lives
we can. To live a comfortable, or even luxurious life it is not
necessary to kill anyone; but it is necessary to allow some to
die whom we might have saved, for the money that we need
to live comfortably could have been given away. Thus the duty
to avoid killing is much easier to discharge completely than the
duty to save. Saving every life we could would mean cutting
our standard of living down to the bare essentials needed to
keep us alive.1
 To discharge this duty completely would require
a degree of moral heroism utterly different from that required
by mere avoidance of killing.
1 Strictly, we would need to cut down to the minimum level compatible with
earning the income which, after providing for our needs, left us most to give
away. Thus if my present position earns me, say, $40,000 a year, but requires
me to spend $5,000 a year on dressing respectably and maintaining a car, I
cannot save more people by giving away the car and clothes if that will mean
taking a job that, although it does not involve me in these expenses, earns
me only $20,000.
223 

A third difference is the greater certainty of the outcome of
shooting when compared with not giving aid. If I point a loaded
gun at someone at close range and pull the trigger, it is virtually
certain that the person will be killed; whereas the money that
I could give might be spent on a project that turns out to be
unsuccessful and helps no one.
Fourth, when people are shot there are identifiable individuals who have been harmed. We can point to them and to their
grieving families. When I buy my stereo system, I cannot know
who my money would have saved if I had given it away. In a
time of famine I may see dead bodies and grieving families on
television reports, and I might not doubt that my money would
have saved some of them; even then it is impossible to point
to a body and say that had I not bought the stereo, that person
would have survived.
Fifth, it might be said that the plight of the hungry is not my
doing, and so I cannot be held responsible for it. The starving
would have been starving if I had never existed. If I kill, however, I am responsible for my victims' deaths, for those people
would not have died if I had not killed them.
These differences need not shake our previous conclusion that
there is no intrinsic difference between killing and allowing to
die. They are extrinsic differences, that is, differences normally
but not necessarily associated with the distinction between killing and allowing to die. We can imagine cases in which someone
allows another to die for malicious or sadistic reasons; we can
imagine a world in which there are so few people needing
assistance, and they are so easy to assist, that our duty not to
allow people to die is as easily discharged as our duty not to
kill; we can imagine situations in which the outcome of not
helping is as sure as shooting; we can imagine cases in which
we can identify the person we allow to die. We can even imagine
a case of allowing to die in which, if I had not existed, the
person would not have died - for instance, a case in which if
I had not been in a position to help (though I don't help)
224 

someone else would have been in my position and would have
helped.
Our previous discussion of euthanasia illustrates the extrinsic
nature of these differences, for they do not provide a basis for
distinguishing active from passive euthanasia. If a doctor decides, in consultation with the parents, not to operate on - and
thus to allow to die - a Down's syndrome infant with an intestinal blockage, her motivation will be similar to that of a
doctor who gives a lethal injection rather than allow the infant
to die. No extraordinary sacrifice or moral heroism will be required in either case. Not operating will just as certainly end in
death as administering the injection. Allowing to die does have
an identifiable victim. Finally, it may well be that the doctor is
personally responsible for the death of the infant she decides
not to operate upon, since she may know that if she had not
taken this case, other doctors in the hospital would have
operated.
Nevertheless, euthanasia is a special case, and very different
from allowing people to starve to death. (The major difference
being that when euthanasia is justifiable, death is a good thing.)
The extrinsic differences that normally mark off killing and allowing to die do explain why we normally regard killing as much
worse than allowing to die.
To explain our conventional ethical attitudes is not to justify
them. Do the five differences not only explain, but also justify,
our attitudes? Let us consider them one by one:
1. Take the lack of an identifiable victim first. Suppose that
I am a travelling salesperson, selling tinned food, and I learn
that a batch of tins contains a contaminant, the known effect
of which, when consumed, is to double the risk that the consumer will die from stomach cancer. Suppose I continue to sell
the tins. My decision may have no identifiable victims. Some
of those who eat the food will die from cancer. The proportion
of consumers dying in this way will be twice that of the community at large, but who among the consumers died because
225 

they ate what I sold, and who would have contracted the disease
anyway? It is impossible to tell; but surely this impossibility
makes my decision no less reprehensible than it would have
been had the contaminant had more readily detectable, though
equally fatal, effects.
2. The lack of certainty that by giving money I could save a
life does reduce the wrongness of not giving, by comparison
with deliberate killing; but it is insufficient to show that not
giving is acceptable conduct. The motorist who speeds through
pedestrian crossings, heedless of anyone who might be on them,
is not a murderer. She may never actually hit a pedestrian; yet
what she does is very wrong indeed.
3. The notion of responsibility for acts rather than omissions
is more puzzling. On the one hand, we feel ourselves to be
under a greater obligation to help those whose misfortunes we
have caused. (It is for this reason that advocates of overseas aid
often argue that Western nations have created the poverty of
third world nations, through forms of economic exploitation
that go back to the colonial system.) On the other hand, any
consequentialist would insist that we are responsible for all the
consequences of our actions, and if a consequence of my spending money on a luxury item is that someone dies, I am responsible for that death. It is true that the person would have
died even if I had never existed, but what is the relevance of
that? The fact is that I do exist, and the consequentialist will
say that our responsibilities derive from the world as it is, not
as it might have been.
One way of making sense of the non-consequentialist view
of responsibility is by basing it on a theory of rights of the kind
proposed by John Locke or, more recently, Robert Nozick. If
everyone has a right to life, and this right is a right against others
w ho might threaten my life, but not a right to assistance from
others when my life is in danger, then we can understand the
feeling that we are responsible for acting to kill but not for
226 

omitting to save. The former violates the rights of others, the
latter does not.
Should we accept such a theory of rights? If we build up our
theory of rights by imagining, as Locke and Nozick do, individuals living independently from each other in a 'state of nature',
it may seem natural to adopt a conception of rights in which
as long as each leaves the other alone, no rights are violated. I
might, on this view, quite properly have maintained my independent existence if I had wished to do so. So if I do not make
you any worse off than you would have been if I had had
nothing at all to do with you, how can I have violated your
rights? But why start from such an unhistorical, abstract and
ultimately inexplicable idea as an independent individual? Our
ancestors were - like other primates - social beings long before
they were human beings, and could not have developed the
abilities and capacities of human beings if they had not been
social beings first. In any case, we are not, now, isolated individuals. So why should we assume that rights must be restricted
to rights against interference? We might, instead, adopt the view
that taking rights to life seriously is incompatible with standing
by and watching people die when one could easily save them.
4. What of the difference in motivation? That a person does
not positively wish for the death of another lessens the severity
of the blame she deserves; but not by as much as our present
attitudes to giving aid suggest. The behaviour of the speeding
motorist is again comparable, for such motorists usually have
no desire at all to kill anyone. They merely enjoy speeding and
are indifferent to the consequences. Despite their lack of malice,
those who kill with cars deserve not only blame but also severe
punishment.
5. Finally, the fact that to avoid killing people is normally not
difficult, whereas to save all one possibly could save is heroic,
must make an important difference to our attitude to failure to
do what the respective principles demand. Not to kill is a min227 

imum standard of acceptable conduct we can require of everyone; to save all one possibly could is not something that can
realistically be required, especially not in societies accustomed
to giving as little as ours do. Given the generally accepted standards, people who give, say, $1,000 a year to an overseas aid
organisation are more aptly praised for above average generosity
than blamed for giving less than they might. The appropriateness
of praise and blame is, however, a separate issue from the rightness or wrongness of actions. The former evaluates the agent:
the latter evaluates the action. Perhaps many people who give
$1,000 really ought to give at least $5,000, but to blame them
for not giving more could be counterproductive. It might make
them feel that what is required is too demanding, and if one is
going to be blamed anyway, one might as well not give anything
at all.
(That an ethic that put saving all one possibly can on the
same footing as not killing would be an ethic for saints or heroes
should not lead us to assume that the alternative must be an
ethic that makes it obligatory not to kill, but puts us under no
obligation to save anyone. There are positions in between these
extremes, as we shall soon see.)
Here is a summary of the five differences that normally exist
between killing and allowing to die, in the context of absolute
poverty and overseas aid. The lack of an identifiable victim is
of no moral significance, though it may play an important role
in explaining our attitudes. The idea that we are directly responsible for those we kill, but not for those we do not help,
depends on a questionable notion of responsibility and may
need to be based on a controversial theory of rights. Differences
in certainty and motivation are ethically significant, and show
that not aiding the poor is not to be condemned as murdering
them; it could, however, be on a par with killing someone as
a result of reckless driving, which is serious enough. Finally the
difficulty of completely discharging the duty of saving all one
possibly can makes it inappropriate to blame those who fall
228 

short of this target as we blame those who kill; but this does
not show that the act itself is less serious. Nor does it indicate
anything about those who, far from saving all they possibly can,
make no effort to save anyone.
These conclusions suggest a new approach. Instead of attempting to deal with the contrast between affluence and poverty by comparing not saving with deliberate killing, let us
consider afresh whether we have an obligation to assist those
whose lives are in danger, and if so, how this obligation applies
to the present world situation.
THE OBLIGATION TO ASSIST
The Argument for an Obligation to Assist
The path from the library at my university to the humanities
lecture theatre passes a shallow ornamental pond. Suppose that
on my way to give a lecture I notice that a small child has fallen
in and is in danger of drowning. Would anyone deny that I
ought to wade in and pull the child out? This will mean getting
my clothes muddy and either cancelling my lecture or delaying
it until I can find something dry to change into; but compared
with the avoidable death of a child this is insignificant.
A plausible principle that would support the judgment that I
ought to pull the child out is this: if it is in our power to prevent
something very bad from happening, without thereby sacrificing
anything of comparable moral significance, we ought to do it.
This principle seems uncontroversial. It will obviously win the
assent of consequentialists; but non-consequentialists should
accept it too, because the injunction to prevent what is bad
applies only when nothing comparably significant is at stake.
Thus the principle cannot lead to the kinds of actions of which
non-consequentialists strongly disapprove - serious violations
of individual rights, injustice, broken promises, and so on. If
non-consequentialists regard any of these as comparable in
229 

moral significance to the bad thing that is to be prevented, they
will automatically regard the principle as not applying in those
cases in which the bad thing can only be prevented by violating
rights, doing injustice, breaking promises, or whatever else is
at stake. Most non-consequentialists hold that we ought to prevent what is bad and promote what is good. Their dispute with
consequentialists lies in their insistence that this is not the sole
ultimate ethical principle: that it is an ethical principle is not
denied by any plausible ethical theory.
Nevertheless the uncontroversial appearance of the principle
that we ought to prevent what is bad when we can do so without
sacrificing anything of comparable moral significance is deceptive. If it were taken seriously and acted upon, our lives and
our world would be fundamentally changed. For the principle
applies, not just to rare situations in which one can save a child
from a pond, but to the everyday situation in which we can
assist those living in absolute poverty. In saying this I assume
that absolute poverty, with its hunger and malnutrition, lack of
shelter, illiteracy, disease, high infant mortality, and low life
expectancy, is a bad thing. And I assume that it is within the
power of the affluent to reduce absolute poverty, without sacrificing anything of comparable moral significance. If these two
assumptions and the principle we have been discussing are correct, we have an obligation to help those in absolute poverty
that is no less strong than our obligation to rescue a drowning
child from a pond. Not to help would be wrong, whether or
not it is intrinsically equivalent to killing. Helping is not, as
conventionally thought, a charitable act that it is praiseworthy
to do, but not wrong to omit; it is something that everyone
ought to do.
This is the argument for an obligation to assist. Set out more
formally, it would look like this.
First premise: If we can prevent something bad without sacrificing anything of comparable significance, we ought to do it.
230 

Second premise: Absolute poverty is bad.
Third premise: There is some absolute poverty we can prevent
without sacrificing anything of comparable moral significance.
Conclusion: We ought to prevent some absolute poverty.
The first premise is the substantive moral premise on which
the argument rests, and I have tried to show that it can be
accepted by people who hold a variety of ethical positions.
The second premise is unlikely to be challenged. Absolute
poverty is, as McNamara put it, 'beneath any reasonable definition of human decency' and it would be hard to find a plausible ethical view that did not regard it as a bad thing.
The third premise is more controversial, even though it is
cautiously framed. It claims only that some absolute poverty
can be prevented without the sacrifice of anything of comparable
moral significance. It thus avoids the objection that any aid I
can give is just 'drops in the ocean' for the point is not whether
my personal contribution will make any noticeable impression
on world poverty as a whole (of course it won't) but whether
it will prevent some poverty. This is all the argument needs to
sustain its conclusion, since the second premise says that any
absolute poverty is bad, and not merely the total amount of
absolute poverty. If without sacrificing anything of comparable
moral significance we can provide just one family with the
means to raise itself out of absolute poverty, the third premise
is vindicated.
I have left the notion of moral significance unexamined in
order to show that the argument does not depend on any specific
values or ethical principles. I think the third premise is true for
most people living in industrialised nations, on any defensible
view of what is morally significant. Our affluence means that
we have income we can dispose of without giving up the basic
necessities of life, and we can use this income to reduce absolute
poverty. Just how much we will think ourselves obliged to give
up will depend on what we consider to be of comparable moral
231 

significance to the poverty we could prevent: stylish clothes,
expensive dinners, a sophisticated stereo system, overseas holidays, a (second?) car, a larger house, private schools for our
children, and so on. For a utilitarian, none of these is likely to
be of comparable significance to the reduction of absolute poverty; and those who are not utilitarians surely must, if they
subscribe to the principle of universalisability, accept that at
least some of these things are of far less moral significance than
the absolute poverty that could be prevented by the money they
cost. So the third premise seems to be true on any plausible
ethical view - although the precise amount of absolute poverty
that can be prevented before anything of moral significance is
sacrificed will vary according to the ethical view one accepts.
Objections to the Argument
Taking care of our own. Anyone who has worked to increase
overseas aid will have come across the argument that we should
look after those near us, our families, and then the poor in our
own country, before we think about poverty in distant places.
No doubt we do instinctively prefer to help those who are
close to us. Few could stand by and watch a child drown; many
can ignore a famine in Africa. But the question is not what we
usually do, but what we ought to do, and it is difficult to see
any sound moral justification for the view that distance, or
community membership, makes a crucial difference to our
obligations.
Consider, for instance, racial affinities. Should people of European origin help poor Europeans before helping poor Africans? Most of us would reject such a suggestion out of hand,
and our discussion of the principle of equal consideration of
interests in Chapter 2 has shown why we should reject it: people's need for food has nothing to do with their race, and if
Africans need food more than Europeans, it would be a violation
232 

of the principle of equal consideration to give preference to
Europeans.
The same point applies to citizenship or nationhood. Every
affluent nation has some relatively poor citizens, but absolute
poverty is limited largely to the poor nations. Those living on
the streets of Calcutta, or in the drought-prone Sahel region of
Africa, are experiencing poverty unknown in the West. Under
these circumstances it would be wrong to decide that only those
fortunate enough to be citizens of our own community will
share our abundance.
We feel obligations of kinship more strongly than those of
citizenship. Which parents could give away their last bowl of
rice if their own children were starving? To do so would seem
unnatural, contrary to our nature as biologically evolved beings
- although whether it would be wrong is another question
altogether. In any case, we are not faced with that situation,
but with one in which our own children are well-fed, wellclothed, well-educated, and would now like new bikes, a stereo
set, or their own car. In these circumstances any special obligations we might have to our children have been fulfilled, and
the needs of strangers make a stronger claim upon us.
The element of truth in the view that we should first take
care of our own, lies in the advantage of a recognised system
of responsibilities. When families and local communities look
after their own poorer members, ties of affection and personal
relationships achieve ends that would otherwise require a large,
impersonal bureaucracy. Hence it would be absurd to propose
that from now on we all regard ourselves as equally responsible
for the welfare of everyone in the world; but the argument for
an obligation to assist does not propose that. It applies only
when some are in absolute poverty, and others can help without
sacrificing anything of comparable moral significance. To allow
one's own kin to sink into absolute poverty would be to sacrifice
something of comparable significance; and before that point had
been reached, the breakdown of the system of family and com233 

munity responsibility would be a factor to weigh the balance
in favour of a small degree of preference for family and community. This small degree of preference is, however, decisively
outweighed by existing discrepancies in wealth and property.
Property rights. Do people have a right to private property, a
right that contradicts the view that they are under an obligation
to give some of their wealth away to those in absolute poverty?
According to some theories of rights (for instance, Robert Nozick's), provided one has acquired one's property without the
use of unjust means like force and fraud, one may be entitled
to enormous wealth while others starve. This individualistic
conception of rights is in contrast to other views, like the early
Christian doctrine to be found in the works of Thomas Aquinas,
which holds that since property exists for the satisfaction of
human needs, 'whatever a man has in superabundance is owed,
of natural right, to the poor for their sustenance'. A socialist
would also, of course, see wealth as belonging to the community
rather than the individual, while utilitarians, whether socialist
or not, would be prepared to override property rights to prevent
great evils.
Does the argument for an obligation to assist others therefore
presuppose one of these other theories of property rights, and
not an individualistic theory like Nozick's? Not necessarily. A
theory of property rights can insist on our right to retain wealth
without pronouncing on whether the rich ought to give to the
poor. Nozick, for example, rejects the use of compulsory means
like taxation to redistribute income, but suggests that we can
achieve the ends we deem morally desirable by voluntary
means. So Nozick would reject the claim that rich people have
an 'obligation' to give to the poor, in so far as this implies that
the poor have a right to our aid, but might accept that giving
is something we ought to do and failing to give, though within
one's rights, is wrong - for there is more to an ethical life than
respecting the rights of others.
234 

The argument for an obligation to assist can survive, with
only minor modifications, even if we accept an individualistic
theory of property rights. In any ca£e, however, I do not think
we should accept such a theory. It leaves too much to chance
to be an acceptable ethical view. For instance, those whose
forefathers happened to inhabit some sandy wastes around the
Persian Gulf are now fabulously wealthy, because oil lay under
those sands; while those whose forefathers settled on better land
south of the Sahara live in absolute poverty, because of drought
and bad harvests. Can this distribution be acceptable from an
impartial point of view? If we imagine ourselves about to begin
life as a citizen of either Bahrein or Chad - but we do not know
which - would we accept the principle that citizens of Bahrein
are under no obligation to assist people living in Chad?
Population and the ethics of triage. Perhaps the most serious objection to the argument that we have an obligation to assist is
that since the major cause of absolute poverty is overpopulation,
helping those now in poverty will only ensure that yet more
people are born to live in poverty in the future.
In its most extreme form, this objection is taken to show that
we should adopt a policy of 'triage'. The term comes from medical policies adopted in wartime. With too few doctors to cope
with all the casualties, the wounded were divided into three
categories: those who would probably survive without medical
assistance, those who might survive if they received assistance,
but otherwise probably would not, and those who even with
medical assistance probably would not survive. Only those in
the middle category were given medical assistance. The idea, of
course, was to use limited medical resources as effectively as
possible. For those in the first category, medical treatment was
not strictly necessary; for those in the third category, it was
likely to be useless. It has been suggested that we should apply
the same policies to countries, according to their prospects of
becoming self-sustaining. We would not aid countries that even
235 

without our help will soon be able to feed their populations.
We would not aid countries that, even with our help, will not
be able to limit their population to a level they can feed. We
would aid those countries where our help might make the difference between success and failure in bringing food and population into balance.
Advocates of this theory are understandably reluctant to give
a complete list of the countries they would place into the 'hopeless' category; Bangladesh has been cited as an example, and
so have some of the countries of the Sahel region of Africa.
Adopting the policy of triage would, then, mean cutting off
assistance to these countries and allowing famine, disease, and
natural disasters to reduce the population of those countries to
the level at which they can provide adequately for all.
In support of this view Garrett Hardin has offered a metaphor:
we in the rich nations are like the occupants of a crowded
lifeboat adrift in a sea full of drowning people. If we try to save
the drowning by bringing them aboard, our boat will be overloaded and we shall all drown. Since it is better that some
survive than none, we should leave the others to drown. In the
world today, according to Hardin, 'lifeboat ethics' apply. The
rich should leave the poor to starve, for otherwise the poor will
drag the rich down with them.
Against this view, some writers have argued that overpopulation is a myth. The world produces ample food to feed its
population, and could, according to some estimates, feed ten
times as many. People are hungry not because there are too
many but because of inequitable land distribution, the manipulation of third world economies by the developed nations,
wastage of food in the West, and so on.
Putting aside the controversial issue of the extent to which
food production might one day be increased, it is true, as we
have already seen, that the world now produces enough to feed
its inhabitants - the amount lost by being fed to animals itself
being enough to meet existing grain shortages. Nevertheless
236 

population growth cannot be ignored. Bangladesh could, with
land reform and using better techniques, feed its present population of 115 million; but by the year 2000, according to United
Nations Population Division estiniates, its population will be
150 million. The enormous effort that will have to go into feeding an extra 35 million people, all added to the population
within a decade, means that Bangladesh must develop at full
speed to stay where it is. Other low-income countries are in
similar situations. By the end of the century, Ethiopia's population is expected to rise from 49 to 66 million; Somalia's from
7 to 9 million, India's from 853 to 1041 million, Zaire's from
35 to 49 million.2
What will happen if the world population continues to grow?
It cannot do so indefinitely. It will be checked by a decline in
birth rates or a rise in death rates. Those who advocate triage
are proposing that we allow the population growth of some
countries to be checked by a rise in death rates - that is, by
increased malnutrition, and related diseases; by widespread famines; by increased infant mortality; and by epidemics of infectious diseases.
The consequences of triage on this scale are so horrible that
we are inclined to reject it without further argument. How could
we sit by our television sets, watching millions starve while we
do nothing? Would not that be the end of all notions of human
equality and respect for human life? (Those who attack the
proposals for legalising euthanasia discussed in Chapter 7, saying that these proposals will weaken respect for human life,
would surely do better to object to the idea that we should
reduce or end our overseas aid programs, for that proposal, if
2 Ominously, in the twelve years that have passed between editions of this
book, the signs are that the situation is becoming even worse than was then
predicted. In 1979 Bangladesh had a population of 80 million and it was
predicted that by 2000 its population would reach 146 million; Ethiopia's
was only 29 million, and was predicted to reach 54 million; and India's was
620 million and predicted to reach 958 million.
237 

implemented, would be responsible for a far greater loss of
human life.) Don't people have a right to our assistance, irrespective of the consequences?
Anyone whose initial reaction to triage was not one of repugnance would be an unpleasant sort of person. Yet initial
reactions based on strong feelings are not always reliable guides.
Advocates of triage are rightly concerned with the long-term
consequences of our actions. They say that helping the poor
and starving now merely ensures more poor and starving in the
future. When our capacity to help is finally unable to cope - as
one day it must be - the suffering will be greater than it would
be if we stopped helping now. If this is correct, there is nothing
we can do to prevent absolute starvation and poverty, in the
long run, and so we have no obligation to assist. Nor does it
seem reasonable to hold that under these circumstances people
have a right to our assistance. If we do accept such a right,
irrespective of the consequences, we are saying that, in Hardin's
metaphor, we should continue to haul the drowning into our
lifeboat until the boat sinks and we all drown.
If triage is to be rejected it must be tackled on its own ground,
within the framework of consequentialist ethics. Here it is vulnerable. Any consequentialist ethics must take probability of
outcome into account. A course of action that will certainly
produce some benefit is to be preferred to an alternative course
that may lead to a slightly larger benefit, but is equally likely
to result in no benefit at all. Only if the greater magnitude of
the uncertain benefit outweighs its uncertainty should we
choose it. Better one certain unit of benefit than a 10 per cent
chance of five units; but better a 50 per cent chance of three
units than a single certain unit. The same principle applies when
we are trying to avoid evils.
The policy of triage involves a certain, very great evil: population control by famine and disease. Tens of millions would
die slowly. Hundreds of millions would continue to live in absolute poverty, at the very margin of existence. Against this
238 

prospect, advocates of the policy place a possible evil that is
greater still: the same process of famine and disease, taking place
in, say, fifty years' time, when tjie world's population may be
three times its present level, and the number who will die from
famine, or struggle on in absolute poverty, will be that much
greater. The question is: how probable is this forecast that continued assistance now will lead to greater disasters in the future?
Forecasts of population growth are notoriously fallible, and
theories about the factors that affect it remain speculative. One
theory, at least as plausible as any other, is that countries pass
through a 'demographic transition' as their standard of living
rises. When people are very poor and have no access to modern
medicine their fertility is high, but population is kept in check
by high death rates. The introduction of sanitation, modern
medical techniques, and other improvements reduces the death
rate, but initially has little effect on the birth rate. Then population grows rapidly. Some poor countries, especially in subSaharan Africa, are now in this phase. If standards of living
continue to rise, however, couples begin to realise that to have
the same number of children surviving to maturity as in the
past, they do not need to give birth to as many children as their
parents did. The need for children to provide economic support
in old age diminishes. Improved education and the emancipation and employment of women also reduce the birth-rate, and
so population growth begins to level off. Most rich nations have
reached this stage, and their populations are growing only very
slowly, if at all.
If this theory is right, there is an alternative to the disasters
accepted as inevitable by supporters of triage. We can assist poor
countries to raise the living standards of the poorest members
of their population. We can encourage the governments of these
countries to enact land reform measures, improve education,
and liberate women from a purely child-bearing role. We can
also help other countries to make contraception and sterilisation
widely available. There is a fair chance that these measures will
239 

hasten the onset of the demographic transition and bring population growth down to a manageable level. According to
United Nations estimates, in 1965 the average woman in the
third world gave birth to six children, and only 8 per cent were
using some form of contraception; by 1991 the average number
of children had dropped to just below four, and more than half
the women in the third world were taking contraceptive measures. Notable successes in encouraging the use of contraception
had occurred in Thailand, Indonesia, Mexico, Colombia, Brazil,
and Bangladesh. This achievement reflected a relatively low
expenditure in developing countries - considering the size and
significance of the problem - of $3 billion annually, with only
20 per cent of this sum coming from developed nations. So
expenditure in this area seems likely to be highly cost-effective.
Success cannot be guaranteed; but the evidence suggests that
we can reduce population growth by improving economic security and education, and making contraceptives more widely
available. This prospect makes triage ethically unacceptable. We
cannot allow millions to die from starvation and disease when
there is a reasonable probability that population can be brought
under control without such horrors.
Population growth is therefore not a reason against giving
overseas aid, although it should make us think about the kind
of aid to give. Instead of food handouts, it may be better to give
aid that leads to a slowing of population growth. This may mean
agricultural assistance for the rural poor, or assistance with education, or the provision of contraceptive services. Whatever
kind of aid proves most effective in specific circumstances, the
obligation to assist is not reduced.
One awkward question remains. What should we do about
a poor and already overpopulated country that, for religious or
nationalistic reasons, restricts the use of contraceptives and refuses to slow its population growth? Should we nevertheless
offer development assistance? Or should we make our offer
conditional on effective steps being taken to reduce the birth240 

rate? To the latter course, some would object that putting conditions on aid is an attempt to impose our own ideas on
independent sovereign nations. So it is - but is this imposition
unjustifiable? If the argument for an"»bligation to assist is sound,
we have an obligation to reduce absolute poverty; but we have
no obligation to make sacrifices that, to the best of our knowledge, have no prospect of reducing poverty in the long run.
Hence we have no obligation to assist countries whose governments have policies that will make our aid ineffective. This could
be very harsh on poor citizens of these countries - for they may
have no say in the government's policies - but we will help
more people in the long run by using our resources where they
are most effective. (The same principles may apply, incidentally,
to countries that refuse to take other steps that could make
assistance effective - like refusing to reform systems of land
holding that impose intolerable burdens on poor tenant
farmers.)
Leaving it to the government. We often hear that overseas aid
should be a government responsibility, not left to privately run
charities. Giving privately, it is said, allows the government to
escape its responsibilities.
Since increasing government aid is the surest way of making
a significant increase to the total amount of aid given, I would
agree that the governments of affluent nations should give much
more genuine, no-strings-attached, aid than they give now. Less
than one-sixth of one per cent of GNP is a scandalously small
amount for a nation as wealthy as the United States to give.
Even the official UN target of 0.7 per cent seems much less than
affluent nations can and should give - though it is a target few
have reached. But is this a reason against each of us giving what
we can privately, through voluntary agencies? To believe that
it is seems to assume that the more people there are who give
through voluntary agencies, the less likely it is that the government will do its part. Is this plausible? The opposite view - that
241 

if no one gives voluntarily the government will assume that its
citizens are not in favour of overseas aid, and will cut its programme accordingly - is more reasonable. In any case, unless
there is a definite probability that by refusing to give we would
be helping to bring about an increase in government assistance,
refusing to give privately is wrong for the same reason that triage
is wrong: it is a refusal to prevent a definite evil for the sake of
a very uncertain gain. The onus of showing how a refusal to
give privately will make the government give more is on those
who refuse to give.
This is not to say that giving privately is enough. Certainly
we should campaign for entirely new standards for both public
and private overseas aid. We should also work for fairer trading
arrangements between rich and poor countries, and less domination of the economies of poor countries by multinational
corporations more concerned about producing profits for shareholders back home than food for the local poor. Perhaps it is
more important to be politically active in the interests of the
poor than to give to them oneself - but why not do both?
Unfortunately, many use the view that overseas aid is the government's responsibility as a reason against giving, but not as
a reason for being politically active.
Too high a standard? The final objection to the argument for an
obligation to assist is that it sets a standard so high that none
but a saint could attain it. This objection comes in at least three
versions. The first maintains that, human nature being what it
is, we cannot achieve so high a standard, and since it is absurd
to say that we ought to do what we cannot do, we must reject
the claim that we ought to give so much. The second version
asserts that even if we could achieve so high a standard, to do
so would be undesirable. The third version of the objection is
that to set so high a standard is undesirable because it will be
perceived as too difficult to reach, and will discourage many
from even attempting to do so.
242 

Those who put forward the first version of the objection are
often influenced by the fact that we have evolved from a natural
process in which those with a high degree of concern for their
own interests, or the interests of their offspring and kin, can be
expected to leave more descendants in future generations, and
eventually to completely replace any who are entirely altruistic.
Thus the biologist Garrett Hardin has argued, in support of his
"lifeboat ethics', that altruism can only exist 'on a small scale,
over the short term, and within small, intimate groups'; while
Richard Dawkins has written, in his provocative book The Selfish
Gene: 'Much as we might wish to believe otherwise, universal
love and the welfare of the species as a whole are concepts
which simply do not make evolutionary sense.' I have already
noted, in discussing the objection that we should first take care
of our own, the very strong tendency for partiality in human
beings. We naturally have a stronger desire to further our own
interests, and those of our close kin, than we have to further
the interests of strangers. What this means is that we would be
foolish to expect widespread conformity to a standard that demands impartial concern, and for that reason it would scarcely
be appropriate or feasible to condemn all those who fail to reach
such a standard. Yet to act impartially, though it might be very
difficult, is not impossible. The commonly quoted assertion that
'ought' implies 'can' is a reason for rejecting such moral judgments as 'You ought to have saved all the people from the
sinking ship', when in fact if you had taken one more person
into the lifeboat, it would have sunk and you would not have
saved any. In that situation, it is absurd to say that you ought
to have done what you could not possibly do. When we have
money to spend on luxuries and others are starving, however,
it is clear that we can all give much more than we do give, and
we can therefore all come closer to the impartial standard proposed in this chapter. Nor is there, as we approach closer to this
standard, any barrier beyond which we cannot go. For that
reason there is no basis for saying that the impartial standard
243 

is mistaken because 'ought' implies 'can' and we cannot be
impartial.
The second version of the objection has been put by several
philosophers during the past decade, among them Susan Wolf
in a forceful article entitled 'Moral Saints'. Wolf argues that if
we all took the kind of moral stance defended in this chapter,
we would have to do without a great deal that makes life interesting: opera, gourmet cooking, elegant clothes, and professional sport, for a start. The kind of life we come to see as
ethically required of us would be a single-minded pursuit of the
overall good, lacking that broad diversity of interests and activities that, on a less demanding view, can be part of our ideal of
a good life for a human being. To this, however, one can respond
that while the rich and varied life that Wolf upholds as an ideal
may be the most desirable form of life for a human being in a
world of plenty, it is wrong to assume that it remains a good
life in a world in which buying luxuries for oneself means accepting the continued avoidable suffering of others. A doctor
faced with hundreds of injured victims of a train crash can
scarcely think it defensible to treat fifty of them and then go to
the opera, on the grounds that going to the opera is part of a
well-rounded human life. The life-or-death needs of others must
take priority. Perhaps we are like the doctor in that we live in
a time when we all have an opportunity to help to mitigate a
disaster.
Associated with this second version of the objection is the
claim that an impartial ethic of the kind advocated here makes
it impossible to have serious personal relationships based on
love and friendship; these relationships are, of their nature,
partial. We put the interests of our loved ones, our family, and
our friends ahead of those of strangers; if we did not do so,
would these relationships survive? I have already indicated, in
the response I gave when considering the objection that we
should first take care of our own, that there is a place, within
an impartially grounded moral framework, for recognising some
244 

degree of partiality for kin, and the same can be said for other
close personal relationships. Clearly, for most people, personal
relationships are among the necessities of a flourishing life, and
to give them up would be to sacrifice something of great moral
significance. Hence no such sacrifice is required by the principle
for which I am here arguing.
The third version of the objection asks: might it not be counterproductive to demand that people give up so much? Might
not people say: 'As I can't do what is morally required anyway,
I won't bother to give at all.' If, however, we were to set a more
realistic standard, people might make a genuine effort to reach
it. Thus setting a lower standard might actually result in more
aid being given.
It is important to get the status of this third version of the
objection clear. Its accuracy as a prediction of human behaviour
is quite compatible with the argument that we are obliged to
give to the point at which by giving more we sacrifice something
of comparable moral significance. What would follow from the
objection is that public advocacy of this standard of giving is
undesirable. It would mean that in order to do the maximum
to reduce absolute poverty, we should advocate a standard
lower than the amount we think people really ought to give.
Of course we ourselves - those of us who accept the original
argument, with its higher standard - would know that we ought
to do more than we publicly propose people ought to do, and
we might actually give more than we urge others to give. There
is no inconsistency here, since in both our private and our public
behaviour we are trying to do what will most reduce absolute
poverty.
For a consequentialist, this apparent conflict between public
and private morality is always a possibility, and not in itself an
indication that the underlying principle is wrong. The consequences of a principle are one thing, the consequences of publicly advocating it another. A variant of this idea is already
acknowledged by the distinction between the intuitive and crit245 

ical levels of morality, of which I have made use in previous
chapters. If we think of principles that are suitable for the intuitive level of morality as those that should be generally advocated, these are the principles that, when advocated, will give
rise to the best consequences. Where overseas aid is concerned,
those will be the principles that lead to largest amount being
given by the affluent to the poor.
Is it true that the standard set by our argument is so high as
to be counterproductive? There is not much evidence to go by,
but discussions of the argument, with students and others have
led me to think it might be. Yet, the conventionally accepted
standard - a few coins in a collection tin when one is waved
under your nose - is obviously far too low. What level should
we advocate? Any figure will be arbitrary, but there may be
something to be said for a round percentage of one's income
like, say, 10 per cent - more than a token donation, yet not so
high as to be beyond all but saints. (This figure has the additional
advantage of being reminiscent of the ancient tithe, or tenth,
that was traditionally given to the church, whose responsibilities
included care of the poor in one's local community. Perhaps
the idea can be revived and applied to the global community.)
Some families, of course, will find 10 per cent a considerable
strain on their finances. Others may be able to give more without
difficulty. No figure should be advocated as a rigid minimum
or maximum; but it seems safe to advocate that those earning
average or above average incomes in affluent societies, unless
they have an unusually large number of dependents or other
special needs, ought to give a tenth of their income to reducing
absolute poverty. By any reasonable ethical standards this is the
minimum we ought to do, and we do wrong if we do less.
246 
11
INSIDERS AND OUTSIDERS
THE SHELTER
I
T is February 2002, and the world is taking stock of the
damage done by the nuclear war in the Middle East towards
the close of the previous year. The global level of radioactivity
now and for about eight years to come is so high that only those
living in fallout shelters can be confident of surviving in reasonable health. For the rest, who must breathe unfiltered air
and consume food and water with high levels of radiation, the
prospects are grim. Probably 10 per cent will die of radiation
sickness within the next two months; another 30 per cent are
expected to develop fatal forms of cancer within five years; and
even the remainder will have rates of cancer ten times higher
than normal, while the risk that their children will be malformed
is fifty times greater than before the war.
The fortunate ones, of course, are those who were far-sighted
enough to buy a share in the fallout shelters built by real-estate
speculators as international tensions rose in the late 1990s. Most
of these shelters were designed as underground villages, each
with enough accommodation and supplies to provide for the
needs of 10,000 people for twenty years. The villages are selfgoverning, with democratic constitutions that were agreed to
in advance. They also have sophisticated security systems that
enable them to admit to the shelter whoever they decide to
admit, and keep out all others.
The news that it will not be necessary to stay in the shelters
for much more than eight years has naturally been greeted with
247 

joy by the members of an underground community called Fairhaven. But it has also led to the first serious friction among
them. For above the shaft that leads down to Fairhaven, there
are thousands of people who are not investors in a shelter. These
people can be seen, and heard, through television cameras installed at the entrance. They are pleading to be admitted. They
know that if they can get into a shelter quickly, they will escape
most of the consequences of exposure to radiation. At first,
before it was known how long it would be until it was safe to
return to the outside, these pleas had virtually no support from
within the shelter. Now, however, the case for admitting at least
some of them has become much stronger. Since the supplies
need last only eight years, they will stretch to more than double
the number of people at present in the shelters. Accommodation
presents only slightly greater problems: Fairhaven was designed
to function as a luxury retreat when not needed for a real emergency, and it is equipped with tennis courts, swimming pools,
and a large gymnasium. If everyone were to consent to keep fit
by doing aerobics in their own living rooms, it would be possible
to provide primitive but adequate sleeping space for all those
whom the supplies can stretch to feed.
So those outside are now not lacking advocates on the inside.
The most extreme, labelled 'bleeding hearts' by their opponents,
propose that the shelter should admit an additional 10,000 people - as many as it can reasonably expect to feed and house
until it is safe to return to the outside. This will mean giving up
all luxury in food and facilities; but the bleeding hearts point
out that the fate for those who remain on the outside will be
far worse.
The bleeding hearts are opposed by some who urge that
these outsiders generally are an inferior kind of person, for they
were either not sufficiently far-sighted, or else not sufficiently
wealthy, to invest in a shelter; hence, it is said, they will cause
social problems in the shelter, placing an additional strain on
health, welfare, and educational services and contributing to an
248 

increase in crime and juvenile delinquency. The opposition to
admitting outsiders is also supported by a small group who say
that it would be an injustice to those who have paid for their
share of the shelter if others who have not paid benefit by it.
These opponents of admitting others are articulate, but few;
their numbers are bolstered considerably, however, by many
who say only that they really enjoy tennis and swimming and
don't want to give it up.
Between the bleeding hearts and those who oppose admitting
any outsiders, stands a middle group: those who think that, as
an exceptional act of benevolence and charity, some outsiders
should be admitted, but not so many as to make a significant
difference to the quality of life within the shelter. They propose
converting a quarter of the tennis courts to sleeping accommodation, and giving up a small public open space that has
attracted little use anyway. By these means, an extra 500 people
could be accommodated, which the self-styled 'moderates' think
would be a sensible figure, sufficient to show that Fairhaven is
not insensitive to the plight of those less fortunate than its own
members.
A referendum is held. There are three proposals: to admit
10,000 outsiders; to admit 500 outsiders; and to admit no outsiders. For which would you vote?
THE REAL WORLD
Like the issue of overseas aid, the situation of refugees today
raises an ethical question about the boundaries of our moral
community - not, as in earlier chapters, on grounds of species,
stage of development, or intellectual capacities, but on nationality. The great majority of the approximately 15 million refugees in the world today are receiving refuge, at least temporarily,
in the poorer and less developed countries of the world. More
than 12 million refugees are in the less developed countries of
Africa, Asia and Latin America. The effect on a poor country of
249 

receiving a sudden influx of millions of refugees can be gauged
from the experience of Pakistan during the 1980s, when it was
home to 2.8 million Afghan refugees - mainly living in the
North West Frontier province. Although Pakistan did get some
outside assistance to feed its refugees, the effects of bearing the
burden of this refugee population for seven years was easily
seen around refugee villages. Whole hillsides were denuded of
trees as a result of the collection of wood for fuel for the refugees.
According to Article 14 of the 1948 United Nations Declaration of Human Rights, 'Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution.' The United
Nations High Commission for Refugees was established in 1950
and the commissioner entrusted with the protection of any
person who is outside the country of his nationality because of a
well founded fear of persecution by reason of his race, religion,
nationality or political opinion, and is unwilling or unable to
avail himself of the protection of his own government'. This definition was originally designed to meet the dislocation caused
by the Second World War in Europe. It is a narrow one, demanding that claims to refugee status be investigated case by case. It
has failed to cover the large-scale movements of people in times
of war, famine, or civil disturbance that have occurred since.
Less than generous responses to refugees are usually justified
by blaming the victim. It has become common to distinguish
'genuine refugees' from 'economic refugees' and to claim that
the latter should receive no assistance. This distinction is dubious, for most refugees leave their countries at great risk and
peril to their lives - crossing seas in leaky boats under attack
from pirates, or making long journeys over armed borders, to
arrive penniless in refugee camps. To distinguish between someone fleeing from political persecution and someone who flees
from a land made uninhabitable by prolonged drought is difficult to justify when they are in equal need of a refuge. The
UN definition, which would not classify the latter as a refugee,
defines away the problem.
250 

What are the possible durable solutions for refugees in the
world today? The main options are: voluntary repatriation, local
integration in the country they first flee to, and resettlement.
Probably the best and most humane solution for refugees
would be to return home. Unfortunately for the majority, voluntary repatriation is not possible because the conditions that
caused them to flee have not changed sufficiently. Local settlement, where refugees can remain and rebuild their lives in
neighbouring countries, is too often impossible because of the
inability of poor, economically struggling - and politically unstable - countries to absorb a new population when their indigenous people face a daily struggle for survival. This option
works best where ethnic and tribal links cross national frontiers.
The difficulty of achieving either voluntary repatriation or
local settlement leaves resettlement in a more remote country
as the only remaining option. With the number of refugees
needing resettlement reaching dimensions never before experienced, the main response of the industrialised countries has
been to institute deterrent policies and close their doors as tight
as they can. Admittedly, resettlement can never solve the problems that make refugees leave their homes. Nor is it, of itself,
a solution to the world refugee problem. Only about 2 per cent
of the world's refugees are permanently resettled. Nevertheless,
the resettlement option is a significant one. It provides markedly
better lives for a considerable number of individuals, even if not
for a large proportion of the total number of refugees.
Resettlement also affects the policies of those countries to
which refugees first flee. If such countries have no hope that
refugees will be resettled, they know that their burden will grow
with every refugee who enters their country. And countries of
first refuge are among those least able to support additional
people. When the resettlement option tightens, the countries to
which refugees first go adopt policies to try to discourage
potential refugees from leaving their country. This policy will
include turning people back at the border, making the camps
251 

as unattractive as possible, and screening the refugees as they
cross the border.
Resettlement is the only solution for those who cannot return
to their own countries in the foreseeable future and are only
welcome temporarily in the country to which they have fled;
in other words for those who have nowhere to go. There are
millions who would choose this option if there were countries
who would take them. For these refugees, resettlement may
mean the difference between life and death. It certainly is their
only hope for a decent existence.
THE EX GRATIA APPROACH
A widely held attitude is that we are under no moral or legal
obligation to accept any refugees at all; and if we do accept
some, it is an indication of our generous and humanitarian
character. Though popular, this view is not self-evidently morally sound. Indeed, it appears to conflict with other attitudes
that are, if we can judge from what people say, at least as widely
held, including the belief in the equality of all human beings,
and the rejection of principles that discriminate on the basis of
race or national origin.
All developed nations safeguard the welfare of their residents
in many ways - protecting their legal rights, educating their
children, and providing social security payments and access to
medical care, either universally or for those who fall below a
defined level of poverty. Refugees receive none of these benefits
unless they are accepted into the country. Since the overwhelming majority of them are not accepted, the overwhelming majority will not receive these benefits. But is this distinction in
the way in which we treat residents and nonresidents ethically
defensible?
Very few moral philosophers have given any attention to the
issue of refugees, even though it is clearly one of the major
moral issues of our time and raises significant moral questions
252 

about who is a member of our moral community. Take, for
example, John Rawls, the Harvard philosopher whose book, A
Theory of Justice, has been the most widely discussed aetount of
justice since its publication in 1971. This 500-page volume deals
exclusively with justice within a society, thus ignoring all the
hard questions about the principles that ought to govern how
wealthy societies respond to the claims of poorer nations, or of
outsiders in need.
One of the few philosophers who has addressed this issue is
another American, Michael Walzer. His Spheres of Justice opens
with a chapter entitled 'The Distribution of Membership' in
which he asks how we constitute the community within which
distribution takes place. In the course of this chapter Walzer
seeks to justify something close to the present situation with
regard to refugee policy. The first question Walzer addresses is:
do countries have the right to close their borders to potential
immigrants? His answer is that they do, because without such
closure, or at least the power to close borders if desired, distinct
communities cannot exist.
Given that the decision to close borders can rightfully be
made, Walzer then goes on to consider how it should be exercised. He compares the political community with a club, and
with a family. Clubs are examples of the ex gratia approach:
'Individuals may be able to give good reason why they should
be selected, but no one on the outside has a right to be inside.'
But Walzer considers the analogy imperfect, because states are
also a bit like families. They are morally bound to open the
doors of their country - not to anyone who wants to come in,
perhaps, but to a particular group of outsiders, recognised as
national or ethnic 'relatives.' In this way Walzer uses the analogy of a family to justify the principle of family reunion as a
basis for immigration policy.
As far as refugees are concerned, however, this is not much
help. Does a political community have the right to exclude
destitute, persecuted, and stateless men and women simply be253 

cause they are foreigners? In Walzer's view the community is
bound by a principle of mutual aid and he rightly notes that
this principle may have wider effects when applied to a community than when applied to an individual, because so many
benevolent actions are open to a community that will only
marginally affect its members. To take a stranger into one's
family is something that we might consider goes beyond the
requirement of mutual aid; but to take a stranger, or even many
strangers, into the community is far less burdensome.
In Walzer's view, a nation with vast unoccupied lands - he
takes Australia as his example, though by assumption rather
than by any examination of Australia's water and soil resources
- may indeed have an obligation in mutual aid to take in people
from densely populated, famine-stricken lands of Southeast
Asia. The choice for the Australian community would then be
to give up whatever homogeneity their society possessed, or to
retreat to a small portion of the land they occupied, yielding
the remainder to those who needed it.
Although not accepting any general obligation on affluent
nations to admit refugees, Walzer does uphold the popular principle of asylum. In accordance with this principle, any refugee
who manages to reach the shores of another country can claim
asylum and cannot be deported back to a country in which he
may be persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, or
political opinion. It is interesting that this principle is so widely
supported, while the obligation to accept refugees is not. The
distinction drawn may reflect some of the principles discussed
in previous chapters of this book. The principle of proximity
clearly plays a role - the person seeking asylum is just physically
closer to us than those in other countries. Perhaps our stronger
support for asylum rests in part on the distinction between an
act (deporting a refugee who has arrived here) and an omission
(not offering a place to a refugee in a distant camp). It could
also be an instance of the difference between doing something
to an identifiable individual, and doing something that we know
254 

will have the same effect on someone, but we will never be
able to tell on whom it has this effect. A further factor is probably
the relatively small number of people who are actually able to
arrive in order to seek asylum, in contrast to the much larger
number of refugees of whose existence we are aware, although
they are far from us. This is the 'drops in the ocean' argument
that was discussed in connection with overseas aid. We can,
perhaps, cope with all the asylum seekers, but no matter how
many refugees we admit, the problem will still be there. As in
the case of the parallel argument against giving overseas aid,
this overlooks the fact that in admitting refugees, we enable
specific individuals to live decent lives and thus are doing something that is worthwhile, no matter how many other refugees
remain whom we are unable to help.
Moderately liberal governments, prepared to heed at least
some humanitarian sentiments, act much as Walzer suggests
they should. They hold that communities have a right to decide
whom they will admit; the claims of family reunion come first,
and those of outsiders from the national ethnic group - should
the state have an ethnic identity - next. The admission of those
in need is an ex gratia act. The right of asylum is usually respected, as long as the numbers are relatively small. Refugees,
unless they can appeal to some special sense of political affinity,
have no real claim to be accepted, and have to throw themselves
on the charity of the receiving country. All of this is in general
agreement with immigration policy in the Western democracies.
As far as refugees are concerned, the ex gratia approach is the
current orthodoxy.
THE FALLACY OF THE CURRENT APPROACH
The current orthodoxy rests on vague and usually unargued
assumptions about the community's right to determine its membership. A consequentialist would hold, instead, that immigration policy should be based squarely on the interests of all those
255 

affected. Where the interests of different parties conflict, we
should be giving equal consideration to all interests, which
would mean that more pressing or more fundamental interests
take precedence over less fundamental interests. The first step
in applying the principle of equal consideration of interests is
to identify those whose interests are affected. The first and most
obvious group is the refugees themselves. Their most pressing
and fundamental interests are clearly at stake. Life in a refugee
camp offers little prospect of anything more than a bare subsistence, and sometimes hardly even that. Here is one observer's
impression of a camp on the Thai-Cambodian border in 1986.
At the time the camp was home for 144,000 people:
The visit of a foreigner causes a ripple of excitement. People
gather round and ask earnestly about the progress of their case
for resettlement, or share their great despair at continual rejection
by the selection bodies for the various countries which will accept
refugees People wept as they spoke, most had an air of quiet
desperation On rice distribution day, thousands of girls and
women mill in the distribution area, receiving the weekly rations
for their family. From the bamboo observation tower the ground
below was just a swirling sea of black hair and bags of rice hoisted
onto heads for the walk home. A proud, largely farming people,
forced to become dependent on UN rations of water, tinned fish
and broken rice, just to survive.
Most of these people could hope for no significant change in
their lives for many years to come. Yet I, along with the others
from outside, could get into a car and drive out of the camp,
return to Taphraya or Aran, drink iced water, eat rice or noodles
at the roadside restaurant at the corner, and observe life passing
by. Those simplest parts of life were invested with a freedom I'd
never valued so highly.
At the same time, refugees accepted into another country have
a good chance of establishing themselves and leading a life as
satisfactory and fulfilling as most of us. Sometimes the interests
of the refugees in being accepted are as basic as the interest in
life itself. In other cases the situation may not be one of life or
256 

death, but it will still profoundly affect the whole course of a
person's life.
The next most directly affected group is the residents of the
recipient nation. How much they will be affected will vary according to how many refugees are taken, how well they will fit
into the community, the current state of the national economy,
and so on. Some residents will be more affected than others:
some will find themselves competing with the refugees for jobs,
and others will not; some will find themselves in a neighborhood with a high population of refugees, and others will not;
and this list could be continued indefinitely, too.
We should not assume that residents of the recipient nation
will be affected for the worse: the economy may receive a boost
from a substantial intake of refugees, and many residents may
find business opportunities in providing for their needs. Others
may enjoy the more cosmopolitan atmosphere created by new
arrivals from other countries: the exotic food shops and restaurants that spring up, and in the long run, the benefits of different
ideas and ways of living. One could argue that in many ways
refugees make the best immigrants. They have nowhere else to
go and must commit themselves totally to their new country,
unlike immigrants who can go home when or if they please.
The fact that they have survived and escaped from hardship
suggests stamina, initiative, and resources that would be of great
benefit to any receiving country. Certainly some refugee groups,
for instance the Indo-Chinese, have displayed great entrepreneurial vigour when resettled in countries like Australia or the
United States.
There are also some other possible and more diffuse consequences that we at least need to think about. For example, it
has been argued that to take large numbers of refugees from
poor countries into affluent ones will simply encourage the flow
of refugees in the future. If poor and over-populated countries
can get rid of their surplus people to other countries, they will
have a reduced incentive to do something about the root causes
257 

of the poverty of their people, and to slow population growth.
The end result could be just as much suffering as if we had
never taken the refugees in the first place.
Consequences also arise from not taking significant numbers
of refugees. Economic stability and world peace depend on international co-operation based on some measure of respect and
trust; but the resource-rich and not over-populated countries
of the world cannot expect to win the respect or trust of the
poorest and most crowded countries if they leave them to cope
with most of the refugee problem as best they can.
So we have a complex mix of interests - some definite, some
highly speculative - to be considered. Equal interests are to be
given equal weight, but which way does the balance lie? Consider a reasonably affluent nation that is not desperately overcrowded, like Australia (I take Australia merely as an example
of a country with which I am familiar; one could, with minor
modifications, substitute other affluent nations.) In the early
1990s Australia is admitting about 12,000 refugees a year, at a
time when there are several million refugees in refugee camps
around the world, many of whom have no hope of returning
to their previous country and are seeking resettlement in a country like Australia. Now let us imagine that Australia decides to
accept twice as many refugees each year as it has in fact been
doing. What can we say are the definite consequences of such
a decision, and what are the possible consequences?
The first definite consequence would be that each year 12,000
more refugees would have been out of the refugee camps and
settled in Australia, where they could expect, after a few years
of struggle, to share in the material comforts, civil rights, and
political security of that country. So 12,000 people would have
been very much better off.
The second definite consequence would have been that each
year Australia would have had 12,000 more immigrants, and
that these additional immigrants would not have been selected
258 

on the basis of possessing skills needed in the Australian economy. They would therefore place an additional demand on welfare services. Some long-term residents of Australia may be
disconcerted by the changes that take place in their neighborhood, as significant numbers of people from a very different
culture move in. More refugees would make some impact on
initial post-arrival services such as the provision of English language classes, housing in the first few months, job placement,
and retraining. But the differences would be minor - after all,
a decade earlier, Australia had accepted approximately 22,000
refugees a year. There were no marked adverse effects from this
larger intake.
At this point, if we are considering the definite consequences
of a doubled refugee intake, in terms of having a significant
impact on the interests of others, we come to a halt. We may
wonder if the increased numbers will lead to a revival of racist
feeling in the community. We could debate the impact on the
Australian environment. We might guess that a larger intake of
refugees will encourage others, in the country from which the
refugees came, to become refugees themselves in order to better
their economic condition. Or we could refer hopefully to the
contribution towards international goodwill that may flow from
a country like Australia easing the burden of less well-off nations
in supporting refugees. But all of these consequences are highly
speculative.
Consider the environmental impact of an extra 12,000 refugees. Certainly, more people will put some additional pressure
on the environment. This means that the increased number of
refugees accepted will be just one item in a long list of factors
that includes the natural rate of reproduction; the government's
desire to increase exports by encouraging an industry based on
converting virgin forests to wood-chips; the subdivision of rural
land in scenic areas for holiday houses; the spurt in popularity
of vehicles suitable for off-road use; the development of ski
259 

resorts in sensitive alpine areas; the use of no-deposit bottles
and other containers that increase litter - the list could be prolonged indefinitely.
If as a community we allow these other factors to have their
impact on the environment, while appealing to the need to
protect our environment as a reason for restricting our intake
of refugees to its present level, we are implicitly giving less
weight to the interests of refugees in coming to Australia than
we give to the interests of Australian residents in having holiday houses, roaring around the countryside in four-wheeldrive vehicles, going skiing, and throwing away their drink
containers without bothering to return them for recycling. Such
a weighting is surely morally outrageous, so flagrant a violation of the principle of equal consideration of interests that I
trust it has only to be exposed in order to be seen as indefensible.
The other arguments are even more problematical. No one
can really say whether doubling Australia's intake of refugees
would have any effect at all on the numbers who might consider
fleeing their own homes; nor is it possible to predict the consequences in terms of international relations. As with the similar
argument linking overseas aid with increased population, in a
situation in which the definite consequences of the proposed
additional intake of refugees are positive, it would be wrong to
decide against the larger intake on such speculative grounds,
especially since the speculative factors point in different directions.
So there is a strong case for Australia to double its refugee
intake. But there was nothing in the argument that relied on
the specific level of refugees now being taken by Australia. If
this argument goes through, it would also seem to follow that
Australia should be taking not an extra 12,000 refugees, but an
extra 24,000 refugees a year. Now the argument seems to be
going too far, for it can then be reapplied to this new level:
should Australia be taking 48,000 refugees? We can double and
260 

redouble the intakes of all the major nations of the developed
world, and the refugee camps around the world will still not
be empty. Indeed, the number of refugees who would seek
resettlement in the developed countries is not fixed, and probably there is some truth in the claim that if all those now in
refugee camps were to be accepted, more refugees would arrive
to take their places. Since the interests of the refugees in resettlement in a more prosperous country will always be greater
than the conflicting interests of the residents of those countries,
it would seem that the principle of equal consideration of interests points to a world in which all countries continue to accept
refugees until they are reduced to the same standard of poverty
and overcrowding as the third world countries from which the
refugees are seeking to flee.
Is this a reason for rejecting the original argument? Does it
mean that if we follow the original argument through it leads
to consequences that we cannot possibly accept; and therefore
there must be a flaw in the argument that has led us to such
an absurd conclusion? This does not follow. The argument
we put forward for doubling Australia's refugee intake does
not really imply that the doubled intake should then be redoubled, and redoubled again, ad infinitum. At some point in
this process - perhaps when the refugee intake is four times
what it now is, or perhaps when it is sixty-four times its
present level - the adverse consequences that are now only
speculative possibilities would become probabilities or virtual
certainties.
There would come a point at which, for instance, the resident
community had eliminated all luxuries that imperilled the environment, and yet the basic needs of the expanding population
were putting such pressure on fragile ecological systems that a
further expansion would do irreparable harm. Or there might
come a point at which tolerance in a multicultural society was
breaking down because of resentment among the resident community, whose members believed that their children were un261 

able to get jobs because of competition from the hard-working
new arrivals; and this loss of tolerance might reach the point
at which it was a serious danger to the peace and security of
all previously accepted refugees and other immigrants from different cultures. When any such point had been reached, the
balance of interests would have swung against a further increase
in the intake of refugees.
The present refugee intake might increase quite dramatically
before any consequences like those mentioned above were
reached; and some may take this as a consequence sufficiently
unacceptable to support the rejection of our line of argument.
Certainly anyone starting from the assumption that the status
quo must be roughly right will be likely to take that view.
But the status quo is the outcome of a system of national
selfishness and political expediency, and not the result of a
considered attempt to work out the moral obligations of the
developed nations in a world with 15 million refugees.
It would not be difficult for the nations of the developed world
to move closer towards fulfilling their moral obligations to refugees. There is no objective evidence to show that doubling
their refugee intake would cause them any harm whatsoever.
Much present evidence, as well as past experience, points the
other way, suggesting that they and their present population
would probably benefit.
But, the leaders will cry, what is moral is not what is
politically acceptable! This is a spurious excuse for inaction.
In many policy areas, presidents and prime ministers are quite
happy to try to convince the electorate of what is right - of
the need to tighten belts in order to balance budgets, or to
desist from drinking and driving. They could just as easily
gradually increase their refugee intakes, monitoring the effects
of the increase through careful research. In this way they
would fulfill their moral and geopolitical obligations and still
benefit their own communities.
262 

SHELTERS AND REFUGES
How would you have voted, in the referendum conducted in
Fairhaven in 1998? I think most people would have been prepared to sacrifice not just a quarter, but all of the tennis courts
to the greater need of those outside. But if you would have
voted with the 'bleeding hearts' in that situation, it is difficult
to see how you can disagree with the conclusion that affluent
nations should be taking far, far more refugees than they are
taking today. For the situation of refugees is scarcely better than
that of the outsiders in peril from nuclear radiation; and the
luxuries that we would have to sacrifice are surely no greater.
263 
1
10
THE ENVIRONMENT
A river tumbles through forested ravines and rocky gorges towards the sea. The state hydro-electricity commission sees the
falling water as untapped energy. Building a dam across one of
the gorges would provide three years of employment for a thousand people, and longer-term employment for twenty or thirty.
The dam would store enough water to ensure that the state could
economically meet its energy needs for the next decade. This
would encourage the establishment of energy-intensive industry
thus further contributing to employment and economic growth.
The rough terrain of the river valley makes it accessible only to
the reasonably fit, but it is nevertheless a favoured spot for bushwalking. The river itself attracts the more daring whitewater
rafters. Deep in the sheltered valleys are stands of rare Huon
Pine, many of the trees being over a thousand years old. The
valleys and gorges are home to many birds and animals, including an endangered species of marsupial mouse that has seldom
been found outside the valley. There may be other rare plants
and animals as well, but no one knows, for scientists are yet to
investigate the region fully.
S
H O U L D the dam be built? This is one example of a situation
in which we must choose between very different sets of
values. The description is loosely based on a proposed dam on
the Franklin River, in the southwest of Australia's island state,
Tasmania - an account of the outcome can be found in Chapter
11, but I have deliberately altered some details, and the above
description should be treated as a hypothetical case. Many other
examples would have posed the choice between values equally
well: logging virgin forests, building a paper mill that will release
pollutants into coastal waters, or opening a new mine on the
264 

edge of a national park. A different set of examples would raise
related, but slightly different, issues: the use of products that
contribute to the depletion of the ozone layer, or to the greenhouse effect; building more nuclear power stations; and so on.
In this chapter I explore the values that underlie debates about
these decisions, and the example I have presented can serve as
a point of reference to these debates. I shall focus particularly
on the values at issue in controversies about the preservation
of wilderness because here the fundamentally different values
of the two parties are most apparent. When we are talking about
flooding a river valley, the choice before us is starkly clear.
In general we can say that those who favour building the
dam are valuing employment and a higher per capita income
for the state above the preservation of wilderness, of plants and
animals (both common ones and members of an endangered
species), and of opportunities for outdoor recreational activities.
Before we begin to scrutinise the values of those who would
have the dam build and those who would not, however, let us
briefly investigate the origins of modern attitudes towards the
natural world.
THE WESTERN TRADITION
Western attitudes to nature grew out of a blend of those of the
Hebrew people, as represented in the early books of the Bible,
and the philosophy of the ancient Greeks, particularly that of
Aristotle. In contrast to some other ancient traditions, for example, those of India, both the Hebrew and the Greek traditions
made human beings the centre of the moral universe - indeed
not merely the centre, but very often, the entirety of the morally
significant features of this world.
The biblical story of creation, in Genesis, makes clear the
Hebrew view of the special place of human beings in the divine
plan:
265 

And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and
over the fowl of the air, and over the earth, and over every
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.
So God created man in his own image, in the image of God
created he him; male and female created he them.
And God blessed them, and God said upon them, Be fruitful,
and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it; and have
dominion over the fish of the sea and over the fowl of the air,
and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.
Today Christians debate the meaning of this grant of 'dominion'; and those concerned about the environment claim that
it should be regarded hot as a license to do as we will with other
living things, but rather as a directive to look after them, on
God's behalf, and be answerable to God for the way in which
we treat them. There is, however, little justification in the text
itself for such an interpretation; and given the example God set
when he drowned almost every animal on earth in order to
punish human beings for their wickedness, it is no wonder that
people should think the flooding of a single river valley is nothing worth worrying about. After the flood there is a repetition
of the grant of dominion in more ominous language: 'And the
fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of
the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth
upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your
hands are they delivered.'
The implication is clear: to act in a way that causes fear and
dread to everything that moves on the earth is not improper;
it is, in fact, in accordance with a God-given decree.
The most influential early Christian thinkers had no doubts
about how man's dominion was to be understood. 'Doth God
care for oxen?' asked Paul, in the course of a discussion of an
Old Testament command to rest one's ox on the sabbath, but
it was only a rhetorical question - he took it for granted that
the answer must be negative, and the command was to be
explained in terms of some benefit to humans. Augustine shared
266 

this line of thought; referring to stories in the New Testament
in which Jesus destroyed a fig tree and caused a herd of pigs
to drown, Augustine explained these puzzling incidents as intended to teach us that 'to refrain from the killing of animals
and the destroying of plants is the height of superstition'.
When Christianity prevailed in the Roman Empire, it also
absorbed elements of the ancient Greek attitude to the natural
world. The Greek influence was entrenched in Christian philosophy by the greatest of the medieval scholastics, Thomas
Aquinas, whose life work was the melding of Christian theology
with the thought of Aristotle. Aristotle regarded nature as a
hierarchy in which those with less reasoning ability exist for
the sake of those with more:
Plants exist for the sake of animals, and brute beasts for the sake
of man — domestic animals for his use and food, wild ones (or
at any rate most of them) for food and other accessories of life,
such as clothing and various tools.
Since nature makes nothing purposeless or in vain, it is undeniably true that she has made all animals for the sake of man.
In his own major work, the Summa Theologica, Aquinas followed this passage from Aristotle almost word for word, adding
that the position accords with God's command, as given in
Genesis. In his classification of sins, Aquinas has room only for
sins against God, ourselves, or our neighbours. There is no possibility of sinning against non-human animals, or against the
natural world.
This was the thinking of mainstream Christianity for at least
its first eighteen centuries. There were gentler spirits, certainly,
like Basil, John Chrysostom, and Francis of Assisi, but for most
of Christian history they have had no significant impact on the
dominant tradition. It is therefore worth emphasising the major
features of this dominant Western tradition, because these features can serve as a point of comparison when we discuss different views of the natural environment.
According to the dominant Western tradition, the natural
267 

world exists for the benefit of human beings. God gave human
beings dominion over the natural world, and God does not care
how we treat it. Human beings are the only morally important
members of this world. Nature itself is of no intrinsic value, and
the destruction of plants and animals cannot be sinful, unless
by this destruction we harm human beings.
Harsh as this tradition is, it does not rule out concern for the
preservation of nature, as long as that concern can be related
to human well-being. Often, of course, it can be. One could,
entirely within the limits of the dominant Western tradition,
oppose nuclear power on the grounds that nuclear fuel, whether
in bombs or power stations, is so hazardous to human life that
the uranium is better left in the ground. Similarly, many arguments against pollution, the use of gases harmful to the ozone
layer, the burning of fossil fuels, and the destruction of forests,
could be couched in terms of the harm to human health and
welfare from the pollutants, or the changes to the climate that
will occur as a result of the use of fossil fuels and the loss of
forest. The greenhouse effect - to take just one danger to our
environment - threatens to bring about a rise in sea level that
will inundate low-lying coastal areas. This includes the fertile
and densely populated Nile delta in Egypt, and the Bengal delta
region, which covers 80 per cent of Bangladesh and is already
subject to violent seasonal storms that cause disastrous floods.
The homes and livelihood of 46 million people are at risk in
these two deltas alone. A rise in sea level could also wipe out
entire island nations such as the Maldives, none of which is
more than a metre or two above sea level. So it is obvious that
even within a human-centred moral framework, the preservation of our environment is a value of the greatest possible
importance.
From the standpoint of a form of civilisation based on growing
crops and grazing animals, wilderness may seem to be a wasteland, a useless area that needs clearing in order to render it
productive and valuable. There was a time when villages sur268 

rounded by farmland seemed like oases of cultivation amongst
the deserts of forest or rough mountain slopes. Now, however,
a different metaphor is more appropriate: the remnants of true
wilderness left to us are like islands amidst a sea of human
activity that threatens to engulf them. This gives wilderness a
scarcity value that provides the basis for a strong argument for
preservation, even within the terms of a human-centred ethic.
That argument becomes much stronger still when we take a
long-term view. To this immensely important aspect of environmental values we shall now turn.
FUTURE GENERATIONS
A virgin forest is the product of all the millions of years that
have passed since the beginning of our planet. If it is cut down,
another forest may grow up, but the continuity has been broken.
The disruption in the natural life cycles of the plants and animals
means that the forest will never again be as it would have been,
had it not been cut. The gains made from cutting the forest -
employment, profits for business, export earnings, and cheaper
cardboard and paper for packaging - are short-term benefits.
Even if the forest is not cut, but drowned to build a dam to
create electricity, it is likely that the benefits will last for only a
generation or two: after that new technology will render such
methods of generating power obsolete. Once the forest is cut or
drowned, however, the link with the past has gone for ever.
That is a cost that will be borne by every generation that succeeds
us on this planet. It is for that reason that environmentalists are
right to speak of wilderness as a 'world heritage'. It is something
that we have inherited from our ancestors, and that we must
preserve for our descendants, if they are to have it at all.
In contrast to many more stable, tradition-oriented human
societies, our modern political and cultural ethos has great difficulty in recognising long-term values. Politicians are notorious
for not looking beyond the next election; but even if they do,
269 

they will find their economic advisers telling them that anything
to be gained in the future should be discounted to such a degree
as to make it easy to disregard the long-term future altogether.
Economists have been taught to apply a discount rate to all
future goods. In other words, a million dollars in twenty years
is not worth a million dollars today, even when we allow for
inflation. Economists will discount the value of the million dollars by a certain percentage, usually corresponding to the real
long-term interest rates. This makes economic sense, because if
I had a thousand dollars today I could invest it so that it would
be worth more, in real terms, in twenty years. But the use of a
discount rate means that values gained one hundred years hence
rank very low, in comparison with values gained today; and
values gained one thousand years in the future scarcely count
at all. This is not because of any uncertainty about whether
there will be human beings or other sentient creatures inhabiting
this planet at that time, but merely because of the cumulative
effect of the rate of return on money invested now. From the
standpoint of the priceless and timeless values of wilderness,
however, applying a discount rate gives us the wrong answer.
There are some things that, once lost, no amount of money can
regain. Thus to justify the destruction of an ancient forest on
the grounds that it will earn us substantial export income is
unsound, even if we could invest that income and increase its
value from year to year; for no matter how much we increased
its value, it could never buy back the link with the past represented by the forest.
This argument does not show that there can be no justification
for cutting any virgin forests, but it does mean that any such
justification must take full account of the value of the forests to
the generations to come in the more remote future, as well as
in the more immediate future. This value will obviously be
related to the particular scenic or biological significance of the
forest; but as the proportion of true wilderness on the earth
dwindles, every part of it becomes significant,! because the op270 

portunities for experiencing wilderness become scarce, and the
likelihood of a reasonable selection of the major forms of wilderness being preserved is reduced.
Can we be sure that future generations will appreciate wilderness? Perhaps they will be happier sitting in air-conditioned
shopping malls, playing computer games more sophisticated
than any we can imagine? That is possible. But there are
several reasons why we should not give this possibility too
much weight. First, the trend has been in the opposite direction: the appreciation of wilderness has never been higher
than it is today, especially among those nations that have
overcome the problems of poverty and hunger and have relatively little wilderness left. Wilderness is valued as something
of immense beauty, as a reservoir of scientific knowledge still
to be gained, for the recreational opportunities that it provides,
and because many people just like to know that something
natural is still there, relatively untouched by modern civilisation. If, as we all hope, future generations are able to provide
for the basic needs of most people, we can expect that for
centuries to come, they, too, will value wilderness for the
same reasons that we value it.
Arguments for preservation based on the beauty of wilderness
are sometimes treated as if they were of little weight because
they are 'merely aesthetic'. That is a mistake. We go to great
lengths to preserve the artistic treasures of earlier human civilisations. It is difficult to imagine any economic gain that we
would be prepared to accept as adequate compensation for, for
instance, the destruction of the paintings in the Louvre. How
should we compare the aesthetic value of wilderness with that
of the paintings in the Louvre? Here, perhaps, judgment does
become inescapably subjective; so I shall report my own experiences. I have looked at the paintings in the Louvre, and in
many of the other great galleries of Europe and the United
States. I think I have a reasonable sense of appreciation of the
271 
1

fine arts; yet I have not had, in any museum, experiences that
have filled my aesthetic senses in the way that they are filled
when I walk in a natural setting and pause to survey the view
from a rocky peak overlooking a forested valley, or sit by a
stream tumbling over moss-covered boulders set amongst tall
tree-ferns, growing in the shade of the forest canopy. I do not
think I am alone in this; for many people, wilderness is the
source of the greatest feelings of aesthetic appreciation, rising
to an almost spiritual intensity.
It may nevertheless be true that this appreciation of nature
will not be shared by people living a century or two hence. But
if wilderness can be the source of such deep joy and satisfaction,
that would be a great loss. To some extent, whether future
generations value wilderness is up to us; it is, at least, a decision
we can influence. By our preservation of areas of wilderness,
we provide an opportunity for generations to come, and by the
books and films we produce, we create a culture that can be
handed on to our children and their children. If we feel that a
walk in the forest, with senses attuned to the appreciation of
such an experience, is a more deeply rewarding way to spend
a day than playing computer games, or if we feel that to carry
one's food and shelter in a backpack for a week while hiking
through an unspoiled natural environment will do more to develop character than watching television for an equivalent period, then we ought to encourage future generations to have a
feeling for nature; if they end up preferring computer games,
we shall have failed.
Finally, if we preserve intact the amount of wilderness that
exists now, future generations will at least have the choice of
getting up from their computer games and going to see a world
that has not been created by human beings. If we destroy the
wilderness, that choice is gone forever. Just as we rightly spend
large sums to preserve cities like Venice, even though future
generations conceivably may not be interested in such architectural treasures, so we should preserve wilderness even
272 

though it is possible that future generations will care little for
it. Thus we will not wrong future generations, as we have been
wronged by members of past generations whose thoughtless
actions have deprived us of the possibility of seeing such animals
as the dodo, Steller's sea cow, or the thylacine, the Tasmanian
marsupial 'tiger'. We must take care not to inflict equally irreparable losses on the generations to follow us.
Here, too, the effort to mitigate the greenhouse effect deserves
the highest priority. For if by 'wilderness' we mean that part of
our planet that is unaffected by human activity, perhaps it is
already too late: there may be no wilderness left anywhere on
our planet. Bill McKibben has argued that by depleting the
ozone layer and increasing the amount of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere, we have already brought about the change encapsulated in the title of his book - The End of Nature: 'By changing
the weather, we make every spot on earth man-made and artificial. We have deprived nature of its independence, and that
is fatal to its meaning. Nature's independence is its meaning;
without it there is nothing but us.'
This is a profoundly disturbing thought. Yet McKibben does
not develop it in order to suggest that we may as well give up
our efforts to reverse the trend. It is true that in one sense of
the term, 'nature' is finished. We have passed a watershed in
the history of our planet. As McKibben says, 'we live in a postnatural world'. Nothing can undo that; the climate of our planet
is under our influence. We still have, however, much that we
value in nature, and it may still be possible to save what is left.
Thus a human-centred ethic can be the basis of powerful
arguments for what we may call 'environmental values'. Such
an ethic does not imply that economic growth is more important
than the preservation of wilderness; on the contrary, it is quite
compatible with a human-centred ethic to see economic growth
based on the exploitation of irreplaceable resources as something that brings gains to the present generation, and possibly
the next generation or two, but at a price that will be paid by
273 

every generation to come. But in the light of our discussion of
speciesism in Chapter 3, it should also be clear that it is wrong
to limit ourselves to a human-centred ethic. We now need to
consider more fundamental challenges to this traditional Western approach to environmental issues.
IS THERE VALUE BEYOND SENTIENT BEINGS?
Although some debates about significant environmental issues
can be conducted by appealing only to the long-term interests
of our own species, in any serious exploration of environmental
values a central issue will be the question of intrinsic value. We
have already seen that it is arbitrary to hold that only human
beings are of intrinsic value. If we find value in human conscious
experiences, we cannot deny that there is value in at least some
experiences of non-human beings. How far does intrinsic value
extend? To all, but only, sentient beings? Or beyond the boundary of sentience?
To explore this question a few remarks on the notion of 'intrinsic value' will be helpful. Something is of intrinsic value if
it is good or desirable in itself; the contrast is with 'instrumental
value', that is, value as a means to some other end or purpose.
Our own happiness, for example, is of intrinsic value, at least
to most of us, in that we desire it for its own sake. Money, on
the other hand, is only of instrumental value to us. We want it
because of the things we can buy with it, but if we were marooned on a desert island, we would not want it. (Whereas
happiness would be just as important to us on a desert island
as anywhere else.)
Now consider again for a moment the issue of damming the
river described at the beginning of this chapter. If the decision
were to be made on the basis of human interests alone, we
would balance the economic benefits of the dam for the citizens
of the state against the loss for bushwalkers, scientists, and
others, now and in the future, who value the preservation of
274 

the river in its natural state. We have already seen that because
this calculation includes an indefinite number of future generations, the loss of the wild river is a much greater cost than
we might at first imagine. Even so, once we broaden the basis
of our decision beyond the interests of human beings, we have
much more to set against the economic benefits of building the
dam. Into the calculations must now go the interests of all the
non-human animals who live in the area that will be flooded.
A few may be able to move to a neighboring area that is suitable,
but wilderness is not full of vacant niches awaiting an occupant;
if there is territory that can sustain a native animal, it is most
likely already occupied. Thus most of the animals living in the
flooded area will die: either they will be drowned, or they will
starve. Neither drowning nor starvation are easy ways to die,
and the suffering involved in these deaths should, as we have
seen, be given no less weight than we would give to an equivalent amount of suffering experienced by human beings. This
will significantly increase the weight of considerations against
building the dam.
What of the fact that the animals will die, apart from the
suffering that will occur in the course of dying? As we have
seen, one can, without being guilty of arbitrary discrimination
on the basis of species, regard the death of a non-human animal
who is not a person as less significant than the death of a person,
since humans are capable of foresight and forward planning in
ways that non-human animals are not. This difference between
causing death to a person and to a being who is not a person
does not mean that the death of an animal who is not a person
should be treated as being of no account. On the contrary,
utilitarians will take into account the loss that death inflicts on
the animals - the loss of all their future existence, and the
experiences that their future lives would have contained. When
a proposed dam would flood a valley and kill thousands, perhaps millions, of sentient creatures, these deaths should be given
great importance in any assessment of the costs and benefits of
275 

building the dam. For those utilitarians who accept the total
view discussed in Chapter 4, moreover, if the dam destroys the
habitat in which the animals lived, then it is relevant that this
loss is a continuing one. If the dam is not built, animals will
presumably continue to live in the valley for thousands of years,
experiencing their own distinctive pleasures and pains. One
might question whether life for animals in a natural environment yields a surplus of pleasure over pain, or of satisfaction
over frustration of preferences. At this point the idea of calculating benefits becomes almost absurd; but that does not mean
that the loss of future animal lives should be dismissed from
our decision making.
That, however, may not be all. Should we also give weight,
not only to the suffering and death of individual animals, but
to the fact that an entire species may disappear? What of the
loss of trees that have stood for thousands of years? How much
- if any - weight should we give to the preservation of the
animals, the species, the trees and the valley's ecosystem, independendy of the interests of human beings - whether economic, recreational, or scientific - in their preservation?
Here we have a fundamental moral disagreement: a disagreement about what kinds of beings ought to be considered in
our moral deliberations. Let us look at what has been said on
behalf of extending ethics beyond sentient beings.
REVERENCE FOR LIFE
The ethical position developed in this book is an extension of
the ethic of the dominant Western tradition. This extended
ethic draws the boundary of moral consideration around all
sentient creatures, but leaves other living things outside that
boundary. The drowning of the ancient forests, the possible
loss of an entire species, the destruction of several complex
ecosystems, the blockage of the wild river itself, and the loss
of those rocky gorges are factors to be taken into account only
276 

in so far as they adversely affect sentient creatures. Is a more
radical break with the traditional position possible? Can some
or all of these aspects of the flooding of the valley be shown
to have intrinsic value, so that they must be taken into account
independently of their effects on human beings or non-human
animals?
To extend an ethic in a plausible way beyond sentient beings
is a difficult task. An ethic based on the interests of sentient
creatures is on familiar ground. Sentient creatures have wants
and desires. The question: 'What is it like to be a possum
drowning?' at least makes sense, even if it is impossible for
us to give a more precise answer than 'It must be horrible'.
In reaching moral decisions affecting sentient creatures, we
can attempt to add up the effects of different actions on all
the sentient creatures affected by the alternative actions open
to us. This provides us with at least some rough guide to what
might be the right thing to do. But there is nothing that corresponds to what it is like to be a tree dying because its roots
have been flooded. Once we abandon the interests of sentient
creatures as our source of value, where do we find value?
What is good or bad for nonsentient creatures, and why does
it matter?
It might be thought that as long as we limit ourselves to living
things, the answer is not too difficult to find. We know what
is good or bad for the plants in our garden: water, sunlight, and
compost are good; extremes of heat or cold are bad. The same
applies to plants in any forest or wilderness, so why not regard
their flourishing as good in itself, independently of its usefulness
to sentient creatures?
One problem here is that without conscious interests to guide
us, we have no way of assessing the relative weights to be given
to the flourishing of different forms of life. Is a two-thousandyear-old Huon pine more worthy of preservation than a tussock
of grass? Most people will say that it is, but such a judgment
seems to have more to do with our feelings of awe for the age,
277 

size, and beauty of the tree, or with the length of time it would
take to replace it, than with our perception of some intrinsic
value in the flourishing of an old tree that is not possessed by
a young grass tussock.
If we cease talking in terms of sentience, the boundary
between living and inanimate natural objects becomes more
difficult to defend. Would it really be worse to cut down an
old tree than to destroy a beautiful stalactite that has taken
even longer to grow? On what grounds could such a judgment
be made? Probably the best known defence of an ethic that
extends to all living things is that of Albert Schweitzer. The
phrase he used, 'reverence for life', is often quoted; the arguments he offered in support of such a position are less wellknown. Here is one of the few passages in which he defended
his ethic:
True philosophy must commence with the most immediate and
comprehensive farts of consciousness. And this may be formulated as follows: 'I am life which wills to live, and I exist in the
midst of life which wills to live.'... Just as in my own will-tolive there is a yearning for more life, and for that mysterious
exaltation of the will which is called pleasure, and terror in face
of annihilation and that injury to the will-to-live which is called
pain; so the same obtains in all the will-to-live around me,
equally whether it can express itself to my comprehension or
whether it remains unvoiced.
Ethics thus consists in this, that I experience the necessity of
practising the same reverence for life toward all will-to-live, as
toward my own. Therein I have already the needed fundamental
principle of morality. It is good to maintain and cherish life; it
is evil to destroy and to check life. A man is really ethical only
when he obeys the constraint laid on him to help all life which
he is able to succour, and when he goes out of his way to avoid
injuring anything living. He does not ask how far this or that
life deserves sympathy as valuable in itself, nor how far it is
capable of feeling. To him life as such is sacred. He shatters no
ice crystal that sparkles in the sun, tears no leaf from its tree,
breaks off no flower, and is careful not to crush any insect as he
278 

walks. If he works by lamplight on a summer evening he prefers
to keep the window shut and to breathe stifling air, rather than
to see insect after insect fall on his table with singed and sinking
wings.
A similar view has been defended recently by the contemporary
American philosopher Paul Taylor. In his book Respect for
Nature, Taylor argues that every living thing is 'pursuing its
own good in its own unique way.' Once we see this, we can
see all living things 'as we see ourselves' and therefore 'we
are ready to place the same value on their existence as we
do on our own'.
It is not clear how we should interpret Schweitzer's position.
The reference to the ice crystal is especially puzzling, for an ice
crystal is not alive at all. Putting this aside, however, the problem
with the defences offered by both Schweitzer and Taylor for
their ethical views is that they use language metaphorically and
then argue as if what they had said was literally true. We may
often talk about plants 'seeking' water or light so that they can
survive, and this way of thinking about plants makes it easier
to accept talk of their 'will to live', or of them 'pursuing' their
own good. But once we stop to reflect on the fact that plants
are not conscious and cannot engage in any intentional behaviour, it is clear that all this language is metaphorical; one might
just as well say that a river is pursuing its own good and striving
to reach the sea, or .that the 'good' of a guided missile is to blow
itself up along with its target. It is misleading of Schweitzer to
attempt to sway us towards an ethic of reverence for all life
by referring to 'yearning', 'exaltation', 'pleasure', and 'terror'.
Plants experience none of these.
Moreover, in the case of plants, rivers, and guided missiles,
it is possible to give a purely physical explanation of what is
happening; and in the absence of consciousness, there is no
good reason why we should have greater respect for the physical
processes that govern the growth and decay of living things than
we have for those that govern non-living things. This being so,
279 

it is at least not obvious why we should have greater reverence
for a tree than for a stalactite, or for a single-celled organism
than for a mountain.
DEEP ECOLOGY
More than forty years ago the American ecologist Aldo Leopold
wrote that there was a need for a 'new ethic', an 'ethic dealing
with man's relation to land and to the animals and plants which
grow upon it'. His proposed 'land ethic' would enlarge 'the
boundaries of the community to include soils, waters, plants,
and animals, or collectively, the land'. The rise of ecological
concern in the early 1970s led to a revival of interest in this
attitude. The Norwegian philosopher Arne Naess wrote a brief
but influential article distinguishing between 'shallow' and
'deep' strands in the ecological movement. Shallow ecological
thinking was limited to the traditional moral framework; those
who thought in this way were anxious to avoid pollution to
our water supply so that we could have safe water to drink,
and they sought to preserve wilderness so that people could
continue to enjoy walking through it. Deep ecologists, on the
other hand, wanted to preserve the integrity of the biosphere
for its own sake, irrespective of the possible benefits to humans
that might flow from so doing. Subsequently several other writers have attempted to develop some form of 'deep' environmental theory.
Where the reverence for life ethic emphasises individual living
organisms, proposals for deep ecology ethics tend to take something larger as the object of value: species, ecological systems,
even the biosphere as a whole. Leopold summed up the basis
of his new land ethic thus: 'A thing is right when it tends to
preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the biotic community. It is wrong when it tends otherwise.' In a paper published in 1984, Arne Naess and George Sessions, an American
philosopher involved in the deep ecology movement, set out
280 

several principles for a deep ecological ethic, beginning with the
following:
1 The well-being and flourishing of human and non-human Life
on Earth have value in themselves (synonyms: intrinsic value,
inherent value). These values are independent of the usefulness of the non-human world for human purposes.
2 Richness and diversity of life forms contribute to the realisation
of these values and are also values in themselves.
3 Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity
except to satisfy vital needs.
Although these principles refer only to life, in the same paper
Naess and Sessions say that deep ecology uses the term 'biosphere' in a more comprehensive way, to refer also to nonliving things such as rivers (watersheds), landscapes, and
ecosystems. Two Australians working at the deep end of environmental ethics, Richard Sylvan and Val Plumwood, also
extend their ethic beyond living things, including in it an obligation 'not to jeopardise the well-being of natural objects or
systems without good reason'.
In the previous section I quoted Paul Taylor's remark to the
effect that we should be ready not merely to respect every living
thing, but to place the same value on the life of every living
thing as we place on our own. This is a common theme among
deep ecologists, often extended beyond living things. In Deep
Ecology Bill Devall and George Sessions defend a form of 'biocentric egalitarianism':
The intuition of biocentric equality is that all things in the biosphere have an equal right to live and blossom and to reach their
own individual forms of unfolding and self-realisation within the
larger Self-realisation. This basic intuition is that all organisms
and entities in the ecosphere, as parts of the interrelated whole,
are equal in intrinsic worth.
If, as this quotation appears to suggest, this biocentric equality
rests on a 'basic intuition', it is up against some strong intuitions
that point in the opposite direction - for example, the intuition
281 

that the rights to 'live and blossom' of normal adult humans
ought to be preferred over those of yeasts, and the rights of
gorillas over those of grasses. If, however, the point is that
humans, gorillas, yeasts, and grasses are all parts of an interrelated whole, then it can still be asked how this establishes that
they are equal in intrinsic worth. Is it because every living thing
plays its role in an ecosystem on which all depend for their
survival? But, firstly, even if this showed that there is intrinsic
worth in micro-organisms and plants as a whole, it says nothing
at all about the value of individual micro-organisms or plants,
since no individual is necessary for the survival of the ecosystem
as a whole. Secondly, the fact that all organisms are part of an
interrelated whole does not suggest that they are all of intrinsic
worth, let alone of equal intrinsic worth. They may be of worth
only because they are needed for the existence of the whole,
and the whole may be of worth only because it supports the
existence of conscious beings.
The ethics of deep ecology thus fail to yield persuasive answers
to questions about the value of the lives of individual living
beings. Perhaps, though, this is the wrong kind of question to
ask. As the science of ecology looks at systems rather than
individual organisms, so ecological ethics might be more plausible if applied at a higher level, perhaps at the level of species
and ecosystems. Behind many attempts to derive values from
ecological ethics at this level lies some form of holism - some
sense that the species or ecosystem is not just a collection of
individuals, but really an entity in its own right. This holism is
made explicit in Lawrence Johnson's A Morally Deep World.
Johnson is quite prepared to talk about the interests of a species,
in a sense that is distinct from the sum of the interests of each
member of the species, and to argue that the interests of a
species, or an ecosystem, ought to be taken into account, alongside individual interests, in our moral deliberations. In The Ecological Self, Freya Mathews contends that any 'self-realising
system' has intrinsic value in that it seeks to maintain or preserve
282 

itself. While living organisms are paradigm examples of selfrealising systems, Mathews, like Johnson, includes species and
ecosystems as holistic entities or selves with their own form of
realisation. She even includes the entire global ecosystem, following James Lovelock in referring to it by the name of the
Greek goddess of the earth, Gaia. On this basis she defends her
own form of biocentric egalitarianism.
There is, of course, a real philosophical question about
whether a species or an ecosystem can be considered as the sort
of individual that can have interests, or a 'self' to be realised;
and even if it can, the deep ecology ethic will face problems
similar to those we identified in considering the idea of reverence for life. For it is necessary, not merely that trees, species,
and ecosystems can properly be said to have interests, but that
they have morally significant interests. If they are to be regarded
as 'selves' it will need to be shown that the survival or realisation
of that kind of self has moral value, independently of the value
it has because of its importance in sustaining conscious life.
We saw in discussing the ethic of reverence for life that one
way of establishing that an interest is morally significant is to
ask what it is like for the entity affected to have that interest
unsatisfied. The same question can be asked about selfrealisation: what is it like for the self to remain unrealised? Such
questions yield intelligible answers when asked of sentient
beings, but not when asked of trees, species, or ecosystems. The
fact that, as James Lovelock points out in Gaia: A New Look at
Life on Earth, the biosphere can respond to events in ways that
resemble a self-maintaining system, does not in itself show that
the biosphere consciously desires to maintain itself. Calling the
global ecosystem by the name of a Greek goddess seems a nice
idea, but it may not be the best way of helping us to think
clearly about its nature. Similarly, on a smaller scale, there is
nothing that corresponds to what it feels like to be an ecosystem
flooded by a dam, because there is no such feeling. In this respect
trees, ecosystems, and species are more like rocks than they are
283 

like sentient beings; so the divide between sentient and nonsentient creatures is to that extent a firmer basis for a morally
important boundary than the divide between living and nonliving things, or between holistic entities and any other entities
that we might not regard as holistic. (Whatever these other
entities could be: even a single atom is, when seen from the
appropriate level, a complex system that 'seeks' to maintain
itself.)
This rejection of the ethical basis for a deep ecology ethic does
not mean that the case for the preservation of wilderness is not
strong. All it means is that one kind of argument - the argument
from the intrinsic value of the plants, species, or ecosystems -
is, at best, problematic. Unless it can be placed on a different,
and firmer footing, we should confine ourselves to arguments
based on the interests of sentient creatures, present and future,
human and non-human. These arguments are quite sufficient
to show that, at least in a society where no one needs to destroy
wilderness in order to obtain food for survival or materials for
shelter from the elements, the value of preserving the remaining
significant areas of wilderness greatly exceeds the economic
values gained by its destruction.
DEVELOPING AN ENVIRONMENTAL ETHIC
In the long run, the set of ethical virtues praised and the set of
ethical prohibitions adopted by the ethic of specific societies will
always reflect the conditions under which they must live and
work in order to survive. That statement is close to being a
tautology, because if a society's ethic did not take into account
whatever was needed for survival, the society would cease to
exist. Many of the ethical standards that we accept today can
be explained in these terms. Some are universal and can be
expected to be beneficial to the community in virtually any
conditions in which humans live. Obviously a society in which
members of the community are permitted to kill each other with
284 

impunity would not last long. Conversely, the parental virtues
of caring for children, and other virtues like honesty, or loyalty
to the group, would foster a stable and lasting community. Other
prohibitions may reflect specific conditions: the practice among
the Eskimo of killing elderly parents no longer able to fend for
themselves, is often cited as a necessary response to life in a
very harsh climate. No doubt the slow pace of changing climatic
conditions, or of migration to different regions, allowed time
for systems of ethics to make the necessary adjustment.
Now we face a new threat to our survival. The proliferation
of human beings, coupled with the by-products of economic
growth, is just as capable as the old threats of wiping out our
society - and every other society as well. No ethic has yet developed to cope with this threat. Some ethical principles that
we do have are exactly the opposite of what we need. The
problem is that, as we have already seen, ethical principles
change slowly and the time we have left to develop a new
environmental ethic is short. Such an ethic would regard every
action that is harmful to the environment as ethically dubious,
and those that are unnecessarily harmful as plainly wrong. That
is the serious point behind my remark in the first chapter that
the moral issues raised by driving a car are more serious than
those raised by sexual behaviour. An environmental ethic would
find virtue in saving and recycling resources, and vice in extravagance and unnecessary consumption. To take just one example: from the perspective of an environmental ethic, our
choice of recreation is not ethically neutral. At present we see
the choice between motor car racing or cycling, between water
skiing or windsurfing, as merely a matter of taste. Yet there is
an essential difference: motor car racing and water skiing require
the consumption of fossil fuels and the discharge of carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere. Cycling and windsurfing do not.
Once we take the need to preserve our environment seriously,
motor racing and water skiing will no more be an acceptable
form of entertainment than bear-baiting is today.
285 

The broad outlines of a truly environmental ethic are easy to
discern. At its most fundamental level, such an ethic fosters
consideration for the interests of all sentient creatures, including
subsequent generations stretching into the far future. It is accompanied by an aesthetic of appreciation for wild places and
unspoiled nature. At a more detailed level, applicable to the
lives of dwellers in cities and towns, it discourages large families.
(Here it forms a sharp contrast to some existing ethical beliefs
that are relics of an age in which the earth was far more lightly
populated; it also offers a counterweight to the implication of
the 'total' version of utilitarianism discussed in Chapter 4.) An
environmental ethic rejects the ideals of a materialist society in
which success is gauged by the number of consumer goods one
can accumulate. Instead it judges success in terms of the development of one's abilities and the achievement of real fulfilment and satisfaction. It promotes frugality, in so far as that is
necessary for minimising pollution and ensuring that everything
that can be re-used is re-used. Carelessly to throw out material
that can be recycled is a form of vandalism or the theft of our
common property in the resources of the world. Thus the various 'green consumer' guides and books about things we can
do to save our planet - recycling what we use and buying the
most environmentally friendly products available - are part of
the new ethic that is required. Even they may prove to be only
an interim solution, a stepping-stone to an ethic in which the
very idea of consuming unnecessary products is questioned.
Wind-surfing may be better than water-skiing, but if we keep
on buying new boards in order to be up to date with the latest
trends in board and sail designs, the difference is only marginal.
We must re-assess our notion of extravagance. In a world
under pressure, this concept is not confined to chauffeured limousines and Dom Perignon champagne. Timber that has come
from a rainforest is extravagant, because the long-term value
of the rainforest is far greater than the uses to which the timber
is put. Disposable paper products are extravagant, because an286 

cient hardwood forests are being converted into wood-chips
and sold to paper manufacturers. 'Going for a drive in the country' is an extravagant use of fossil fuels that contributes to the
greenhouse effect. During the Second World War, when petrol
was scarce, posters asked: 'Is your journey really necessary?'
The appeal to national solidarity against a visible and immediate
danger was highly effective. The danger to our environment is
less immediate and much harder to see, but the need to cut out
unnecessary journeys and other forms of unnecessary consumption is just as great.
As far as food is concerned, the great extravagance is not
caviar or truffles, but beef, pork, and poultry. Some 38 per cent
of the world's grain crop is now fed to animals, as well as large
quantities of soybeans. There are three times as many domestic
animals on this planet as there are human beings. The combined
weight of the world's 1.28 billion cattle alone exceeds that of
the human population. While we look darkly at the number of
babies being born in poorer parts of the world, we ignore the
over-population of farm animals, to which we ourselves contribute. The prodigious waste of grain that is fed to intensively
farmed animals has already been mentioned in Chapters 3 and
8. That, however, is only part of the damage done by the animals
we deliberately breed. The energy-intensive factory farming
methods of the industrialised nations are responsible for the
consumption of huge amounts of fossil fuels. Chemical fertilisers, used to grow the feed crops for cattle in feedlots and pigs
and chickens kept indoors in sheds, produce nitrous oxide, another greenhouse gas. Then there is the loss of forests. Everywhere, forest dwellers, both human and non-human, are being
pushed out. Since 1960, 25 per cent of the forests of Central
America have been cleared for cattle. Once cleared, the poor
soils will support grazing for a few years; then the graziers must
move on. Scrub takes over the abandoned pasture, but the forest
does not return. When the forests are cleared so that cattle can
graze, billions of tons of carbon dioxide are released into the
287 

atmosphere. Finally, the world's cattle are thought to produce
about 20 per cent of the methane released into the atmosphere,
and methane traps twenty-five times as much heat from the
sun as carbon dioxide. Factory farm manure also produces
methane because, unlike manured dropped naturally in the
fields, it does not decompose in the presence of oxygen. All of
this amounts to a compelling reason, additional to that developed in Chapter 3, for a largely plant-based diet.
The emphasis on frugality and a simple life does not mean
that an environmental ethic frowns upon pleasure, but that the
pleasures it values do not come from conspicuous consumption.
They come, instead, from warm personal and sexual relationships, from being close to children and friends, from conversation, from sports and recreations that are in harmony with
our environment instead of being harmful to it; from food that
is not based on the exploitation of sentient creatures and does
not cost the earth; from creative activity and work of all kinds;
and (with due care so as not to ruin precisely what is valued)
from appreciating the unspoiled places in the world in which
we live.
288 
11
ENDS AND MEANS
WE have examined a number of ethical issues. We have
seen that many accepted practices are open to serious
objections. What ought we to do about it? This, too, is an ethical
issue. Here are four actual cases to consider.
Oskar Schindler was a German industrialist. During the war
he ran a factory near Cracow, in Poland. At a time when Polish
Jews were being sent to death camps, he assembled a labour
force of Jewish inmates from concentration camps and the
ghetto, considerably larger than his factory needed, and used
several illegal strategems, including bribing members of the SS
and other officials, to protect them. He spent his own money
to buy food on the black market to supplement the inadequate
official rations he obtained for his workers. By these methods
he was able to save the lives of about 1,200 people.
In 1984 Dr Thomas Gennarelli directed a Head Injury
Laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia.
Members of an underground organisation called the Animal
Liberation Front knew that Gennarelli inflicted head injuries
on monkeys there and had been told that the monkeys underwent the experiments without being properly anaesthetised.
They also knew that Gennarelli and his collaborators videotaped their experiments, to provide a record of what happened
during and after the injuries they inflicted. They tried to obtain
further information through official channels but were unsuccessful. In May 1984, they broke into the laboratory at
289 

night and found thirty-four videotapes. They then systematically destroyed laboratory equipment before leaving with the
tapes. The tapes clearly showed conscious monkeys struggling
as they were being strapped to an operating table where head
injuries were inflicted; they also showed experimenters mocking and laughing at frightened animals about to be used in
experiments. When an edited version of the tapes was released
to the public, it produced widespread revulsion. Nevertheless, it took a further year of protests, culminating in a sitin at the headquarters of the government organisation that
was funding Gennarelli's experiments, before the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services ordered the experiments
stopped.
In 1986 Joan Andrews entered an abortion clinic in Pensacola,
Florida, and damaged a suction abortion apparatus. She refused to be represented in court, on the grounds that 'the true
defendants, the pre-born children, received none, and were
killed without due process'. Andrews was a supporter of Operation Rescue, an American organisation that takes its name,
and its authority to act, from the biblical injunction to 'rescue
those who are drawn toward death and hold back those stumbling to the slaughter'. Operation Rescue uses civil disobedience to shut down abortion clinics, thus, in its view, 'sparing
the lives of unborn babies whom the Rescuers are morally
pledged to defend'. Participants block the doors of the clinics
to prevent physicians and pregnant women seeking abortion
from entering. They attempt to dissuade pregnant women from
approaching the clinic by 'sidewalk counselling' on the nature
of abortion. Gary Leber, an Operation Rescue director, has
said that, between 1987 and 1989 alone, as a direct result of
such 'rescue missions', at least 421 women changed their
minds about having abortions, and the children of these
women, who would have been killed, are alive today.
290 

In 1976 Bob Brown, then a young medical practitioner, rafted
down the Franklin river, in Tasmania's southwest. The wild
beauty of the river and the peace of the undisturbed forests
around it impressed him deeply. Then, around a bend on the
lower reaches of the river, he came across workers for the
Hydro-Electric Commission, studying the feasibility of building a dam across the river. Brown gave up his medical practice
and founded the Tasmanian Wilderness Society, with the object
of protecting the state's remaining wilderness areas. Despite
vigorous campaigning, the Hydro-Electric Commission recommended the building of the dam, and after some vacillation the
state government, with support both from the business community and the labour unions, decided to go ahead. The Tasmanian Wilderness Society organized a non-violent blockade
of the road being built to the dam site. In 1982, Brown, along
with many others, was arrested and jailed for four days for
trespassing on land controlled by the Hydro-Electric Commission. But the blockade became a focus of national attention,
and although the Australian federal government was not directly responsible for the dam, it became an issue in the federal
election that was then due. The Australian Labor Party, in opposition before the election, pledged to explore constitutional
means of preventing the dam from going ahead. The election
saw the Labor party elected to office, and legislation passed to
stop the dam. Though challenged by the Tasmanian government, the legislation was upheld by a narrow majority of the
High Court of Australia on the grounds that the Tasmanian
southwest was a World Heritage area, and the federal government had constitutional powers to uphold the international
treaty creating the World Heritage Commission. Today the
Franklin still runs free.
Do we have an overriding obligation to obey the law? Oskar
Schindler, the members of the Animal Liberation Front who
291 

took Gennarelli's videotapes, Joan Andrews of Operation Rescue, and Bob Brown and those who joined him in front of the
bulldozers in Tasmania's southwest were all breaking the law.
Were they all acting wrongly?
The question cannot be dealt with by invoking the simplistic
formula: 'the end never justifies the means'. For all but the
strictest adherent of an ethic of rules, the end sometimes does
justify the means. Most people think that lying is wrong, other
things being equal, yet think it right to lie in order to avoid
causing unnecessary offence or embarrassment - for instance,
when a well-meaning relative gives you a hideous vase for your
birthday, and then asks if you really like it. If this relatively
trivial end can justify lying, it is even more obvious that some
important end - preventing a murder, or saving animals from
great suffering - can justify lying. Thus the principle that the
end cannot justify the means is easily breached. The difficult
issue is not whether the end can ever justify the means, but
which means are justified by which ends.
INDIVIDUAL CONSCIENCE AND THE LAW
There are many people who are opposed to damming wild
rivers, to the exploitation of animals, or to abortion, but who
do not break the law in order to stop these activities. No doubt
some members of the more conventional conservation, animal
liberation, and anti-abortion organizations do not commit illegal
acts because they do not wish to be fined or imprisoned; but
others would be prepared to take the consequences of illegal
acts. They refrain only because they respect and obey the moral
authority of the law.
Who is right in this ethical disagreement? Are we under any
moral obligation to obey the law, if the law protects and sanctions things we hold utterly wrong? A clear-cut answer to this
question was given by the nineteenth-century American radical,
292 

Henry Thoreau. In his essay entitled 'Civil Disobedience' - perhaps the first use of this now-familiar phrase - he wrote:
Must the citizen ever for a moment, or in the least degree, resign
his conscience to the legislator? Why has every man a conscience,
then? I think we should be men first and subjects afterwards. It
is not desirable to cultivate a respect for the law, so much as for
the right. The only obligation which I have a right to assume, is
to do at any time what I think right.
The American philosopher Robert Paul Wolff has written in
similar vein:
The defining mark of the state is authority, the right to rule. The
primary obligation of man is autonomy, the refusal to be ruled,
It would seem, then, that there can be no resolution of the conflict
between the autonomy of the individual and the putative authority of the state. Insofar as a man fulfills his obligation to
make himself the author of his decisions, he will resist the state's
claim to have authority over him.
Thoreau and Wolff resolve the conflict between individual and
society in favour of the individual. We should do as our conscience dictates, as we autonomously decide we ought to do:
not as the law directs. Anything else would be a denial of our
capacity for ethical choice.
Thus stated, the issue looks straightforward and the ThoreauWolff answer obviously right. So Oskar Schindler, the Animal
Liberation Front, Joan Andrews, and Bob Brown were fully
justified in doing what they saw to be right, rather than what
the state laid down as lawful. But is it that simple? There is a
sense in which it is undeniable that, as Thoreau says, we ought
to do what we think right; or, as Wolff puts it, make ourselves
the authors of our decisions. Faced with a choice between doing
what we think right and what we think wrong, of course we
ought to do what we think right. But this, though true, is not
much help. What we need to know is not whether we should
do what we decide to be right, but how we should decide what
is right.
293 

Think about the difference of opinion between members of
groups like the Animal Liberation Front (ALF) and more lawabiding members of an organization like Britain's Royal Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA): ALF members think inflicting pain on animals is, unless justified by extraordinary circumstances, wrong, and if the best way to stop
it is by breaking the law then they think that breaking the law
is right. RSPCA members - let us assume - also think that
inflicting pain on animals is normally wrong, but they think
breaking the law is wrong, too, and they think that the wrongness of breaking the law cannot be justified by the goal of stopping the unjustifiable infliction of pain on animals. Now suppose
there are people opposed to inflicting pain on animals who are
uncertain whether they should join the militant lawbreakers or
the more orthodox animal welfare group. How does telling these
people to do what they think right, or to be the author of their
own decisions, resolve their uncertainty? The uncertainty is an
uncertainty about what is the right thing to do, not about
whether to do what one has decided to be right.
This point can be obscured by talk of 'following one's conscience' irrespective of what the law commands. Some who talk
of 'following conscience' mean no more than doing what, on
reflection, one thinks right - and this may, as in the case of our
imagined RSPCA members, depend on what the law commands. Others mean by 'conscience' not something dependent
on critical reflective judgment, but a kind of internal voice that
tells us that something is wrong and may continue to tell us
this despite our careful reflective decision, based on all the relevant ethical considerations, that the action is not wrong. In
this sense of 'conscience' an unmarried woman brought up as
a strict Roman Catholic to believe that sex outside marriage is
always wrong may abandon her religion and come to hold that
there is no sound basis for restricting sex to marriage - yet
continue to feel guilty when she has sex. She may refer to these
294 

guilt feelings as her 'conscience' but if that is her conscience,
should she follow it?
To say that we should follow our conscience is unobjectionable - and unhelpful - when 'following conscience' means
doing what, on reflection, one thinks right. When 'following
conscience' means doing as one's 'internal voice' prompts one
to do, however, to follow one's conscience is to abdicate one's
responsibility as a rational agent, to fail to take all the relevant
factors into account and act on one's best judgment of the rights
and wrongs of the situation. The 'internal voice' is more likely
to be a product of one's upbringing and education than a source
of genuine ethical insight.
Presumably neither Thoreau nor Wolff wish to suggest that
we should always follow our conscience in the 'internal voice'
sense. They must mean, if their views are to be at all plausible,
that we should follow our judgment about what we ought to
do. In this case the most that can be said for their recommendations is that they remind us that decisions about obeying the
law are ethical decisions that the law itself cannot settle for us.
We should not assume, without reflection, that if the law prohibits, say, stealing videotapes from laboratories, it is always
wrong to do so - any more than we should assume that if the
law prohibits hiding Jews from the Nazis, it is wrong to do so.
Law and ethics are distinct. At the same time, this does not
mean that the law carries no moral weight. It does not mean
that any action that would have been right if it had been legal
must be right although it is in fact illegal. That an action is illegal
may be of ethical, as well as legal, significance. Whether it really
is ethically significant is a separate question.
LAW AND ORDER
If we think that a practice is seriously wrong, and if we have
the courage and ability to disrupt this practice by breaking the
295 

law, how could the illegality of this action provide an ethical
reason against it? To answer a question as specific as this, we
should first ask a more general one: why have laws at all?
Human beings are social in nature, but not so social that we
do not need to protect ourselves against the risk of being assaulted or killed by our fellow humans. We might try to do this
by forming vigilante organizations to prevent assaults and punish those who commit them; but the results would be haphazard
and liable to grow into gang warfare. Thus it is desirable to
have, as John Locke said long ago, 'an established, settled,
known law', interpreted by an authoritative judge and backed
with sufficient power to carry out the judge's decisions.
If people voluntarily refrained from assaulting others, or acting
in other ways inimical to a harmonious and happy social existence, we might manage without judges and sanctions. We
would still need law-like conventions about such matters as
which side of the road one drives on. Even an anarchist Utopia
would have some settled principles of cooperation. So we would
have something rather like law. In reality, not everyone is going
to voluntarily refrain from behaviour, like assaults, that others
cannot tolerate. Nor is it only the danger of individual acts like
assaults that make law necessary. In any society there will be disputes: about how much water farmers may take from the river to
irrigate their crops, about the ownership of land, or the custody
of a child, about the control of pollution, and the level of taxation. Some settled decision-procedure is necessary for resolving
such disputes economically and speedily, or else the parties to the
dispute are likely to resort to force. Almost any established decision-procedure is better than a resort to force, for when force is
used people get hurt. Moreover, most decision-procedures produce results at least as beneficial and just as a resort to force.
So laws and a settled decision-procedure to generate them
are a good thing. This gives rise to one important reason for
obeying the law. By obeying the law, I can contribute to the
296 

respect in which the established decision-procedure and the
laws are held. By disobeying I set an example to others that
may lead them to disobey too. The effect may multiply and
contribute to a decline in law and order. In an extreme case it
may lead to civil war.
A second reason for obedience follows immediately from this
first. If law is to be effective - outside the anarchist's Utopia -
there must be some machinery for detecting and penalizing lawbreakers. This machinery will cost something to maintain and
operate, and the cost will have to be met by the community. If
I break the law the community will be put to the expense of
enforcement.
These two reasons for obeying the law are neither universally
applicable nor conclusive. They are not, for instance, applicable
to breaches of the law that remain secret. If, late at night when
the streets are deserted, I cross the road against the red light,
there is no one to be led into disobedience by my example, and
no one to enforce the law against so crossing. But this is not
the kind of illegality we are interested in.
Where they are applicable, these two reasons for obedience
are not conclusive, because there are times when the reasons
against obeying a particular law are more important than the
risks of encouraging others to disobey or the costs to the community of enforcing the law. They are genuine reasons for obeying, and in the absence of reasons for disobeying, are sufficient
to resolve the issue in favour of obedience; but where there are
conflicting reasons, we must assess each case on its merits in
order to see if the reasons for disobeying outweigh these reasons
for obedience. If, for instance, illegal acts were the only way of
preventing many painful experiments on animals, of saving significant areas of wilderness, or of prodding governments into
increasing overseas aid, the importance of the ends would justify
running some risk of contributing to a general decline in obedience to law.
297 

DEMOCRACY
At this point some will say: the difference between Oskar Schindler's heroic deeds and the indefensible illegal actions of the
Animal Liberation Front, Operation Rescue, and the opponents
of the Franklin dam is that in Nazi Germany there were no legal
channels that Schindler could use to bring about change. In a
democracy there are legal means of ending abuses. The existence
of legal procedures for changing the law makes the use of illegal
means unjustifiable.
It is true that in democratic societies there are legal procedures
that can be used by those seeking reforms; but this in itself does
not show that the use of illegal means is wrong. Legal channels
may exist, but the prospects of using them to bring about change
in the foreseeable future may be very poor. While one makes
slow and painful progress - or perhaps no progress at all -
through these legal channels, the indefensible wrongs one is
trying to stop will be continuing. Prior to the successful struggle
to save the Franklin River, an earlier political campaign had
been fought against another dam proposed by the Tasmanian
Hydro-Electric Commission. This dam was opposed because it
would flood a pristine alpine lake, Lake Peddar, situated in a
national park. This campaign employed more orthodox political
tactics. It failed, and Lake Peddar disappeared under the waters
of the dam. Dr Thomas Gennarelli's laboratory had carried out
experiments for several years before the Animal Liberation Front
raided it. Without the evidence of the stolen videotapes, it would
probably still be functioning today. Similarly, Operation Rescue
was founded after fourteen years of more conventional political
action had failed to reverse the permissive legal situation regarding abortion that has existed in the United States since the
Supreme Court declared restrictive abortion laws unconstitutional in 1973. During that period, according to Operation Rescue's Gary Leber, 'twenty-five million Americans have been
"legally" killed'. From this perspective it is easy to see why the
298 

existence of legal channels for change does not solve the moral
dilemma. An extremely remote possibility of legal change is not
a strong reason against using means more likely to succeed. The
most that can follow from the mere existence of legitimate channels is that, since we cannot know whether they will prove
successful until we have tried them, their existence is a reason
for postponing illegal acts until legal means have been tried and
have failed.
Here the upholder of democratic laws can try another tack:
if legal means fail to bring about reform, it shows that the
proposed reform does not have the approval of the majority of
the electorate; and to attempt to implement the reform by illegal
means against the wishes of the majority would be a violation
of the central principle of democracy, majority rule.
The militant can challenge this argument on two grounds,
one factual and the other philosophical. The factual claim in
the democrat's argument is that a reform that cannot be implemented by legal means lacks the approval of the majority of
the electorate. Perhaps this would hold in a direct democracy,
in which the whole electorate voted on each issue; but it is
certainly not always true of modern representative democracies.
There is no way of ensuring that on any given issue a majority
of representatives will take the same view as a majority of their
constituents. One can be reasonably confident that a majority
of those Americans who saw, on television, excerpts from Gennarelli's videotapes would not have supported the experiments.
But that is not how decisions are made in a democracy. In
choosing between representatives - or in choosing between political parties - voters elect to take one 'package deal' in preference to other package deals on offer. It will often happen that
in order to vote for policies they favour, voters must go along
with other policies they are not keen on. It will also happen
that policies voters favour are not offered by any major party.
In the case of abortion in the United States, the crucial decision
was not made by a majority of voters, but by the Supreme Court.
299 

It cannot be overturned by a simple majority of the electors, but
only by the Court itself, or by the complicated procedure of a
constitutional amendment, which can be thwarted by a minority
of the electorate.
What if a majority did approve of the wrong that the militants
wish to stop? Would it then be wrong to use illegal means?
Here we have the philosophical claim underlying the democratic
argument for obedience, the claim that we ought to accept the
majority decision.
The case for majority rule should not be overstated. No sensible democrat would claim that the majority is always right. If
49 per cent of the population can be wrong, so can 51 per cent.
Whether the majority supports the views of the Animal Liberation Front or of Operation Rescue does not settle the question
whether these views are morally sound.Perhaps the fact that
these groups are in a minority - if they are - means that they
should reconsider their means. With a majority behind them,
they could claim to be acting with democratic principles on their
side, using illegal means to overcome flaws in the democratic
machinery. Without that majority, all the weight of democratic
tradition is against them and it is they who appear as coercers,
trying to force the majority into accepting something against its
will. But how much moral weight should we give to democratic
principles?
Thoreau, as we might expect, was not impressed by majority
decision making. 'All voting,' he wrote, 'is a sort of gaming,
like checkers or backgammon, with a slight moral tinge to it, a
playing with right and wrong, with moral questions.' In a sense
Thoreau was right. If we reject, as we must, the doctrine that
the majority is always right, to submit moral issues to the vote
is to gamble that what we believe to be right will come out of
the ballot with more votes behind it than what we believe to
be wrong; and that is a gamble we will often lose.
Nevertheless we should not be too contemptuous about voting, or gambling either. Cowboys who agree to play poker to
300 

decide matters of honour do better than cowboys who continue
to settle such matters in the traditional Western manner. A
society that decides its controversial issues by ballots does better
than one that uses bullets. To some extent this is a point we
have already encountered, under the heading 'law and order'.
It applies to any society with an established, peaceful method
of resolving disputes; but in a democracy there is a subtle difference that gives added weight to the outcome of the decisionprocedure. A method of settling disputes in which no one has
greater ultimate power than anyone else is a method that can
be recommended to all as a fair compromise between competing
claims to power. Any other method must give greater power to
some than to others and thereby invites opposition from those
w ho have less. That, at least, is true in the egalitarian age in
which we live. In a feudal society in which people accept as
natural and proper their status as lord or vassal there is no
challenge to the feudal lord and no compromise would be
needed. (I am thinking of an ideal feudal system, as I am thinking of an ideal democracy.) Those times, however, seem to be
gone forever. The breakdown of traditional authority created a
need for political compromise. Among possible compromises,
giving one vote to each person is uniquely acceptable to all. As
such, in the absence of any agreed procedure for deciding on
some other distribution of power, it offers, in principle, the
firmest possible basis for a peaceful method of settling disputes.
To reject majority rule, therefore, is to reject the best possible
basis for the peaceful ordering of society in an egalitarian age.
Where else should one turn? To a meritocratic franchise, with
extra votes for the more intelligent or better educated, as John
Stuart Mill once proposed? But could we agree on who merits
extra votes? To a benevolent despot? Many would accept that
- if they could choose the despot. In practice the likely outcome
of abandoning majority rule is none of these: it is the rule of
those who command the greatest force.
So the principle of majority rule does carry substantial moral
301 

weight. Disobedience is easier to justify in a dictatorship like
Nazi Germany than in a democracy like those of North America,
Europe, India, Japan, or Australia today. In a democracy we
should be reluctant to take any action that amounts to an attempt to coerce the majority, for such attempts imply the rejection of majority rule and there is no acceptable alternative
to that. There may, of course, be cases where the majority decision is so appalling that coercion is justified, whatever the risk.
The obligation to obey a genuine majority decision is not absolute. We show our respect for the principle not by blind obedience to the majority, but by regarding ourselves as justified
in disobeying only in extreme circumstances.
DISOBEDIENCE, CIVIL OR OTHERWISE
If we draw together our conclusions on the use of illegal means
to achieve laudable ends, we shall find that: (1) there are reasons
why we should normally accept the verdict of an established
peaceful method of settling disputes; (2) these reasons are particularly strong when the decision-procedure is democratic and
the verdict represents a genuine majority view; but (3) there
are still situations in which the use of illegal means can be
justified.
We have seen that there are two distinct ways in which one
might try to justify the use of illegal means in a society that is
democratic (even if imperfectly so, as, to varying degrees, existing democracies are). The first is on the grounds that the
decision one is objecting to is not a genuine expression of majority opinion. The second is that although the decision is a
genuine expression of the majority view, this view is so seriously
wrong that action against the majority is justified.
It is disobedience on the first ground that best merits the name
'civil disobedience'. Here the use of illegal means can be regarded as an extension of the use of legal means to secure a
302 

genuinely democratic decision. The extension may be necessary
because the normal channels for securing reform are not working properly. On some issues parliamentary representatives are
overly influenced by skilled and well-paid special interests. On
others the public is unaware of what is happening. Perhaps the
abuse requires administrative, rather than legislative change,
and the bureaucrats of the civil service have refused to be inconvenienced. Perhaps the legitimate interests of a minority are
being ignored by prejudiced officials. In all these cases, the nowstandard forms of civil disobedience - passive resistance,
marches, or sit-ins - are appropriate. The blockade of the HydroElectric Commission's road into the site of the proposed Franklin
river dam was a classic case of civil disobedience in this sense.
In these situations disobeying the law is not an attempt to
coerce the majority. Instead disobedience attempts to inform the
majority; or to persuade parliamentarians that large numbers
of electors feel very strongly about the issue; or to draw national
attention to an issue previously left to bureaucrats; or to appeal
for reconsideration of a decision too hastily made. Civil disobedience is an appropriate means to these ends when legal
means have failed, because, although it is illegal, it does not
threaten the majority or attempt to coerce them (though it will
usually impose some extra costs on them, for example for law
enforcement). By not resisting the force of the law, by remaining
non-violent and by accepting the legal penalty for their actions,
civil disobedients make manifest both the sincerity of their protest and their respect for the rule of law and the fundamental
principles of democracy.
So conceived, civil disobedience is not difficult to justify. The
justification does not have to be strong enough to override the
obligation to obey a democratic decision, since disobedience is
an attempt to restore, rather than frustrate, the process of democratic decision making. Disobedience of this kind could be
justified by, for instance, the aim of making the public aware
303 

of the loss of irreplaceable wilderness caused by the construction
of a dam, or of how animals are treated in the laboratories and
factory farms that few people ever see.
The use of illegal means to prevent action undeniably in accordance with the majority view is harder - but not impossible
- to justify. We may think it unlikely that a Nazi-style policy
of genocide could ever be approved by a majority vote, but if
that were to happen it would be carrying respect for majority
rule to absurd lengths to regard oneself as bound to accept the
majority decision. To oppose evils of that magnitude, we are
justified in using virtually any means likely to be effective.
Genocide is an extreme case. To grant that it justifies the use
of illegal means even against a majority concedes very little in
terms of practical political action. Yet admitting even one exception to the obligation to abide by democratic decisions raises
further questions: where is the line to be drawn between evils
like genocide, where the obligation is clearly overridden, and
less serious issues, where it is not? And who is to decide on
which side of this imaginary line a particular issue falls? Gary
Leber, of Operation Rescue, has written that in the United States
alone, since 1973, 'We've already destroyed four times the number of people that Hitler did.' Ronnie Lee, one of the British
founders of the Animal Liberation Front, has also used the Nazi
metaphor for what we do to animals, saying: 'Although we are
only one species among many on earth, we've set up a Reich
totally dominating the other animals, even enslaving them.' It
is not surprising then, that these activists consider their disobedience well justified. But do they have the right to take this
decision themselves? If not, who is to decide when an issue is
so serious that, even in a democracy, the obligation to obey the
law is overridden?
The only answer this question can have is: we must decide
for ourselves on which side of the line particular cases fall. There
is no other way of deciding, since the society's method of settling
304 

issues has already made its decision. The majority cannot be
judge in its own case. If we think the majority decision wrong,
we must make up our own minds about how gravely it is wrong.
This does not mean that any decision we make on such an
issue is subjective or arbitrary. In this book, I have offered arguments about a number of moral issues. If we apply these
arguments to the four cases with which this chapter began, they
lead to specific conclusions. The racist Nazi policy of murdering
Jews was obviously an atrocity, and Oskar Schindler was entirely right to do what he could to save some Jews from falling
victim to it. (Given the personal risks he ran, he was also morally
heroic to do so.) On the basis of the arguments put forward in
Chapter 3 of this book, the experiments that Gennarelli conducted on monkeys were wrong, because they treated sentient
creatures as mere things to be used as research tools. To stop
such experiments is a desirable goal, and if breaking in to Gennarelli's laboratory and stealing his videotapes was the only way
to achieve it, that seems to me justifiable. Similarly, for reasons
explored in Chapter 10, to drown the Franklin valley in order
to generate a relatively small amount of electricity could only
have been based on values that were unjustifiable both for taking a short-term perspective, and for being overly humancentred. Civil disobedience was an appropriate means of testifying to the importance of the values that had been overlooked
by those who favoured the dam.
At the same time, the arguments that lie behind Operation
Rescue's activities were found to be flawed when they were
examined in Chapter 6. The human fetus is not entitled to the
same sort of protection as older human beings, and so those
who think of abortion as morally equivalent to murder are
wrong. On this basis, Operation Rescue's campaign of civil disobedience against abortion is not justifiable. But it is important
to realise that the mistake lies in Operation Rescue's moral
reasoning about abortion, not in their moral reasoning about
305 

civil disobedience. If abortion really were morally equivalent to
murder, we all ought to be out there blocking the doors to the
abortion clinics.
This makes life difficult, of course. It is not likely that members
of Operation Rescue will be convinced by the arguments in this
book. Their reliance on biblical quotations does not augur well
for their openness to moral reasoning on non-religious grounds.
So there is no easy way of convincing them that their civil
disobedience is unjustified. We may regret this, but there is
nothing to be done about it. There is no simple moral rule that
will enable us to declare when disobedience is justifiable and
when it is not, without going into the rights and wrongs of the
target of the disobedience.
When we are convinced that we are trying to stop something
that really is a serious moral wrong, we still have other moral
questions to ask ourselves. We must balance the magnitude of
the evil we are trying to stop against the possibility that our
actions will lead to a drastic decline in respect for law and for
democracy. We must also take into account the likelihood that
our actions will fail in their objective and provoke a reaction
that will reduce the chances of success by other means. (As, for
instance, terrorist attacks on an oppressive regime provide the
government with an ideal excuse to lock up its more moderate
political opponents, or violent attacks on experimenters enable
the research establishment to brand all critics of animal experimentation as terrorists.)
One result of a consequentialist approach to this issue that
may at first seem odd is that the more deeply ingrained the habit
of obedience to democratic rule, the more easily disobedience
can be defended. There is no paradox here, however, merely
another instance of the homely truth that while young plants
need to be cosseted, well-established specimens can take
rougher treatment. Thus on a given issue disobedience might
be justifiable in Britain or the United States but not in Cambodia
306 

or Russia during the period when these countries seek to establish democratic systems of government.
These issues cannot be settled in general terms. Every case
differs. When the evils to be stopped are neither utterly horrendous (like genocide) nor relatively harmless (like the design
for a new national flag), reasonable people will differ on the
justifiability of attempting to thwart the implementation of a
considered decision democratically reached. Where illegal
means are used with this aim, an important step has been taken,
for disobedience then ceases to be 'civil disobedience', if by that
term is meant disobedience that is justified by an appeal to
principles that the community itself accepts as the proper way
of running its affairs. It may still be best for such obedience to
be civil in the other sense of the term, which makes a contrast
with the use of violence or the tactics of terrorism.
VIOLENCE
As we have seen, civil disobedience intended as a means of
attracting publicity or persuading the majority to reconsider is
much easier to justify than disobedience intended to coerce the
majority. Violence is obviously harder still to defend. Some go
so far as to say that the use of violence as a means, particularly
violence against people, is never justified, no matter how good
the end.
Opposition to the use of violence can be on the basis of an
absolute rule, or an assessment of its consequences. Pacifists
have usually regarded the use of violence as absolutely wrong,
irrespective of its consequences. This, like other 'no matter what'
prohibitions, assumes the validity of the distinction between
acts and omissions. Without this distinction, pacifists who refuse
to use violence when it is the only means of preventing greater
violence would be responsible for the greater violence they fail
to prevent.
307 

Suppose we have an opportunity to assassinate a tyrant who
is systematically murdering his opponents and anyone else he
dislikes. We know that if the tyrant dies he will be replaced by
a popular opposition leader, now in exile, who will restore the
rule of law. If we say that violence is always wrong, and refuse
to carry out the assassination, mustn't we bear some responsibility for the tyrant's future murders?
If the objections made to the acts and omissions distinction
in Chapter 7 were sound, those who do not use violence to
prevent greater violence have to take responsibility for the violence they could have prevented, Thus the rejection of the acts
and omissions distinction makes a crucial difference to the discussion of violence, for it opens the door to a plausible argument
in defence of violence.
Marxists have often used this argument to rebut attacks on
their doctrine of the need for violent revolution. In his classic
indictment of the social effects of nineteenth-century capitalism,
The Condition of the Working Class in England, Engels wrote:
If one individual inflicts a bodily injury upon another which
leads to the death of the person attacked we call it manslaughter;
on the other hand, if the attacker knows beforehand that the
blow will be fatal we call it murder. Murder has also been committed if society places hundreds of workers in such a position
that they inevitably come to premature and unnatural ends. Their
death is as violent as if they had been stabbed or shot Murder
has been committed if thousands of workers have been deprived
of the necessities of life or if they have been forced into a situation
in which it is impossible for them to survive Murder has been
committed if society knows perfectly well that thousands of
workers cannot avoid being sacrificed so long as these conditions
are allowed to continue. Murder of this sort is just as culpable
as the murder committed by an individual. At first sight it does
not appear to be murder at all because responsibility for the death
of the victim cannot be pinned on any individual assailant. Everyone is responsible and yet no one is responsible, because it appears as if the victim has died from natural causes. If a worker
dies no one places the responsibility for his death on society,
308 

though some would realize that society has failed to take steps
to prevent the victim from dying. But it is murder all the same.
One might object to Engels's use of the term 'murder'. The
objection would resemble the arguments discussed in Chapter
8, when we considered whether our failure to aid the starving
makes us murderers. We saw that there is no intrinsic significance in the distinction between acts and omissions; but from
the point of view of motivation and the appropriateness of
blame, most cases of failing to prevent death are not equivalent
to murder. The same would apply to the cases Engels describes.
Engels tries to pin the blame on 'society', but 'society' is not a
person or a moral agent, and cannot be held responsible in the
way an individual can.
Still, this is nit-picking. Whether or not 'murder' is the right
term, whether or not we are prepared to describe as 'violent'
the deaths of malnourished workers in unhealthy and unsafe
factories, Engels's fundamental point stands. These deaths are
a wrong of the same order of magnitude as the deaths of
hundreds of people in a terrorist bombing would be. It would
be one-sided to say that violent revolution is always absolutely
wrong, without taking account of the evils that the revolutionaries are trying to stop. If violent means had been the only way
of changing the conditions Engels describes, those who opposed
the use of violent means would have been responsible for the
continuation of those conditions.
Some of the practices we have been discussing in this book
are violent, either directly or by omission. In the case of nonhuman animals, our treatment is often violent by any description. Those who regard the human fetus as a moral subject will
obviously consider abortion to be a violent act against it. In the
case of humans at or after birth, what are we to say of an
avoidable situation in which some countries have infant mortality rates eight times higher than others, and a person born
in one country can expect to live twenty years more than someone born in another country? Is this violence? Again, it doesn't
309 

really matter whether we call it violence or not. In its effects it
is as terrible as violence.
Absolutist condemnations of violence stand or fall with the
distinction between acts and omissions. Therefore they fall.
There are, however, strong consequentialist objections to the
use of violence. We have been premising our discussion on the
assumption that violence might be the only means of changing
things for the better. Absolutists have no interest in challenging
this assumption because they reject violence whether the assumption is true or false. Consequentialists must ask whether
violence ever is the only means to an important end, or, if not
the only means, the swiftest means. They must also ask about
the long-term effects of pursuing change by violent means.
Could one defend, on consequentialist grounds, a condemnation of violence that is in practice, if not in principle, as allencompassing as that of the absolute pacifist? One might attempt to do so by emphasising the hardening effect that the use
of violence has, how committing one murder, no matter how
'necessary' or 'justified' it may seem, lessens the resistance to
committing further murders. Is it likely that people who have
become inured to acting violently will be able to create a better
society? This is a question on which the historical record is
relevant. The course taken by the Russian Revolution must
shake the belief that a burning desire for social justice provides
immunity to the corrupting effects of violence. There are, admittedly, other examples that may be read the other way; but
it would take a considerable number of examples to outweigh
the legacy of Lenin and Stalin.
The consequentialist pacifist can use another argument - the
argument I urged against the suggestion that we should allow
starvation to reduce the populations of the poorest nations to
the level at which they could feed themselves. Like this policy,
violence involves certain harm, said to be justified by the prospects of future benefits. But the future benefits can never be
certain, and even in the few cases where violence does bring
310 

about desirable ends, we can rarely be sure that the ends could
not have been achieved equally soon by non-violent means.
What, for instance, has been achieved by the thousands of
deaths and injuries caused by more than twenty years of the
Irish Republican Army bombings in Northern Ireland? Only
counter-terrorism by extremist Protestant groups. Or think of
the wasted death and suffering caused by the Baader-Meinhoff
gang in Germany, or the Red Brigade in Italy. What did the
Palestinian Liberation Organization gain from terrorism, other
than a less compromising, more ruthless Israel than the one
against which they began their struggle? One may sympathize
with the ends some of these groups are fighting for, but the
means they are using hold no promise of gaining their ends.
Using these means therefore indicates callous disregard of the
interests of their victims. These consequentialist arguments add
up to a strong case against the use of violence as a means,
particularly when the violence is indiscriminately directed
against ordinary members of the public, as terrorist violence
often is. In practical terms, that kind of violence would seem
never justified.
There are other kinds of violence that cannot be ruled out so
convincingly. There is, for instance, the assassination of a murderous tyrant. Here, provided the murderous policies are an
expression of the tyrant's personality rather than part of the
institutions he commands, the violence is strictly limited, the
aim is the end of much greater violence, success from a single
violent act may be highly probable, and there may be no other
way of ending the tyrant's rule. It would be implausible for a
consequentialist to maintain that committing violence in these
circumstances would have a corrupting effect, or that more,
rather than less, violence would result from the assassination.
Violence may be limited in a different way. The cases we have
been considering have involved violence against people. These
are the standard cases that come to mind when we discuss
violence, but there are other kinds of violence. Animal Liber311 

ation Front members have damaged laboratories, cages, and
equipment used to confine, hurt, or kill animals, but they avoid
violent acts against any animal, human or non-human. (Other
organizations claiming to be acting on behalf of animals have,
however, injured at least two people by explosive devices. These
actions have been condemned by every well-known animal
liberation organization, including the Animal Liberation Front.)
Earth First!, a radical American environmentalist organization,
advocates 'monkeywrenching' or 'ecotage' - secret acts designed to stop or slow down processes that are harmful to the
environment. Dave Foreman and Bill Haywood of Earth First!
have co-edited Ecodefense: A Field Guide to Monkeywrenching, a
book that describes techniques for disabling computers, wrecking machinery, and blocking sewerage systems. In their view:
Monkeywrenching is a non-violent resistance to the destruction
of natural diversity and wilderness. It is not aimed toward harming human beings or other forms of life. |t is aimed at inanimate
machines and tools Monkeywrenchers are very conscious of
the gravity of what they do. They are deliberate about taking
such a serious step They remember that they are engaged in
the most moral of all actions: protecting life, defending the Earth.
A more controversial technique is 'spiking' trees in forests that
are to be logged. Putting metal spikes in a few trees in a forest
makes it dangerous to saw timber from the forest, because the
workers at the sawmill can never know when the saw might
hit a spike, breaking the saw and sending sharp pieces of metal
flying around the working area. Ecological activists who support
spiking say that they warn the timber companies that trees in
a certain area have been spiked, and if they go ahead and log
the forests, any injuries that occur are the responsibility of the
timber company managers who made that decision. But it is
the workers who will be hurt, not the managers. Can the activists really shed their responsibility in this way? More orthodox environmental activists reject such tactics.
Damage to property is not as serious a matter as injuring or
312 

killing; hence it may be justified on grounds that would not
justify anything that caused harm to sentient beings. This does
not mean that violence to property is of no significance. Property
means a great deal to some people, and one would need to
have strong reasons to justify destroying it. But such reasons
may exist. The justification might not be anything so epochmaking as transforming society. As in the case of the raid on
Gennarelli's laboratory, it might be the specific and short-term
goal of saving a number of animals from a painful experiment,
performed on animals only because of society's speciesist bias.
Again, whether such an action would really be justifiable from
a consequentialist point of view would depend on the details
of the actual situation. Someone lacking expertise could easily
be mistaken about the value of an experiment or the degree of
suffering it involved. And will not the result of damaging equipment and liberating one lot of animals simply be that more
equipment is bought and more animals are bred? What is to be
done with the liberated animals? Will illegal acts mean that the
government will resist moves to reform the law relating to animal experiments, arguing that it must not appear to be yielding
to violence? All these questions would need to be answered
satisfactorily before one could come to a decision in favour of,
say, damaging a laboratory. A related set of questions must also
be answered before one can justify damaging a bulldozer that
is being used to clear an old-growth forest.
Violence is not easy to justify, even if it is violence against
property rather than against sentient beings, or violence against
a dictator rather than indiscriminate violence against the general
public. Nevertheless, the differences between kinds of violence
are important, because only by observing them can we condemn
one kind of violence - the terrorist kind - in virtually absolute
terms. The differences are blurred by sweeping condemnations
of everything that falls under the general heading 'violence'.
313 
12
WHY ACT MORALLY?
P
REVIOUS chapters of this book have discussed what we
ought, morally, to do about several practical issues and what
means we are justified in adopting to achieve our ethical goals.
The nature of our conclusions about these issues - the demands
they make upon us - raises a further, more fundamental question: why should we act morally?
Take our conclusions about the use of animals for food, or
the aid the rich should give the poor. Some readers may accept
these conclusions, become vegetarians, and do what they can
to reduce absolute poverty. Others may disagree with our conclusions, maintaining that there is nothing wrong with eating
animals and that they are under no moral obligation to do
anything about reducing absolute poverty. There is also, however, likely to be a third group, consisting of readers who find
no fault with the ethical arguments of these chapters, yet do
not change their diets or their contributions to overseas aid. Of
this third group, some will just be weak-willed, but others may
want an answer to a further practical question. If the conclusions
of ethics require so much of us, they may ask, should we bother
about ethics at all?
UNDERSTANDING THE QUESTION
'Why should I act morally?' is a different type of question from
those that we have been discussing up to now. Questions like
'Why should I treat people of different ethnic groups equally?'
or 'Why is abortion justifiable?' seek ethical reasons for acting
314 
?
in a certain way. These are questions within ethics. They presuppose the ethical point of view. 'Why should I act morally?'
is on another level. It is not a question within ethics, but a
question about ethics.
'Why should I act morally?' is therefore a question aboutsomething normally presupposed. Such questions are perplexing. Some philosophers have found this particular question so
perplexing that they have rejected it as logically improper, as
an attempt to ask something that cannot properly be asked.
One ground for this rejection is the claim that our ethical
principles are, by definition, the principles we take as overridingly important. This means that whatever principles are
overriding for a particular person are necessarily that person's
ethical principles, and a person who accepts as an ethical principle that she ought to give her wealth to help the poor must,
by definition, have actually decided to give away her wealth.
On this definition of ethics once a person has made an ethical
decision no further practical question can arise. Hence it is impossible to make sense of the question: 'Why should I act
morally?'
It might be thought a good reason for accepting the definition
of ethics as overriding that it allows us to dismiss as meaningless
an otherwise troublesome question. Adopting this definition
cannot solve real problems, however, for it leads to correspondingly greater difficulties in establishing any ethical conclusion.
Take, for example, the conclusion that the rich ought to aid the
poor. We were able to argue for this in Chapter 8 only because
we assumed that, as suggested in the first two chapters of this
book, the universalisability of ethical judgments requires us to
go beyond thinking only about our own interests, and leads us
to take a point of view from which we must give equal consideration to the interests of all affected by our actions. We cannot
hold that ethical judgments must be universalisable and at the
same time define a person's ethical principles as whatever principles that person takes as overridingly important - for what if
315 

I take as overridingly important some non-universalisable principle like 'I ought to do whatever benefits me"? If we define
ethical principles as whatever principles one takes as overriding,
then anything whatever may count as an ethical principle, for
one may take any principle whatever as overridingly important.
Thus what we gain by being able to dismiss the question:'Why
should I act morally?' we lose by being unable to use the universalisability of ethical judgments - or any other feature of
ethics - to argue for particular conclusions about what is morally
right. Taking ethics as in some sense necessarily involving a
universal point of view seems to me a more natural and less
confusing way of discussing these issues.
Other philosophers have rejected 'Why should I act morally?'
for a different reason. They think it must be rejected for the
same reason that we must reject another question, 'Why should
I be rational?' which like 'Why should I act morally?' also
questions something - in this case rationality - normally presupposed. 'Why should I be rational?' really is logically improper because in answering it we would be giving reasons for
being rational. Thus we would presuppose rationality in our
attempt to justify rationality. The resulting justification of rationality would be circular - which shows, not that rationality
lacks a necessary justification, but that it needs no justification,
because it cannot intelligibly be questioned unless it is already
presupposed.
Is 'Why should I act morally?' like 'Why should I be rational?'
in that it presupposes the very point of view it questions? It
would be, if we interpreted the 'should' as a moral 'should'.
Then the question would ask for moral reasons for being moral.
This would be absurd. Once we have decided that an action is
morally obligatory, there is no further moral question to ask. It
is redundant to ask why I should, morally, do the action that I
morally should do.
There is, however, no need to interpret the question as a
request for an ethical justification of ethics. 'Should' need not
316 
?
mean 'should, morally'. It could simply be a way of asking for
reasons for action, without any specification about the kind of
reasons wanted. We sometimes want to ask a general practical
question, from no particular point of view. Faced with a difficult
choice, we ask a close friend for advice. Morally, he says, we
ought to do A, but B would be more in our interests, while
etiquette demands C and only D would display a real sense of
style. This answer may not satisfy us. We want advice on which
of these standpoints to adopt. If it is possible to ask such a
question we must ask it from a position of neutrality between
all these points of view, not of commitment to any one of them.
'Why should I act morally?' is this sort of question. If it is
not possible to ask practical questions without presupposing a
point of view, we are unable to say anything intelligible about
the most ultimate practical choices. Whether to act according
to considerations of ethics, self-interest, etiquette, or aesthetics
would be a choice 'beyond reason' - in a sense, an arbitrary
choice. Before we resign ourselves to this conclusion we should
at least attempt to interpret the question so that the mere asking
of it does not commit us to any particular point of view.
We can now formulate the question more precisely. It is a
question about the ethical point of view, asked from a position
outside it. But what is 'the ethical point of view'? I have suggested that a distinguishing feature of ethics is that ethical judgments are universalisable. Ethics requires us to go beyond our
own personal point of view to a standpoint like that of the
impartial spectator who takes a universal point of view.
Given this conception of ethics, 'Why should I act morally?'
is a question that may properly be asked by anyone wondering
whether to act only on grounds that would be acceptable from
this universal point of view. It is, after all, possible to act - and
some people do act - without thinking of anything except one's
own interests. The question asks for reasons for going beyond
this personal basis of action and acting only on judgments one
is prepared to prescribe universally.
317 

REASON AND ETHICS
There is an ancient line of philosophical thought that attempts
to demonstrate that to act rationally is to act ethically. The
argument is today associated with Kant and is mainly found in
the writings of modern Kantians, though it goes back as least
as far as the Stoics. The form in which the argument is presented
varies, but the common structure is as follows:
1 Some requirement of universalisability or impartiality is essential to ethics.
2 Reason is universally or objectively valid. If, for example, itfollows from the premises 'All humans are mortal' and 'Socrates is human' that Socrates is mortal, then this inference
must follow universally. It cannot be valid for me and invalid
for you. This is a general point about reason, whether theoretical or practical.
Therefore:
3 Only a judgment that satisfies the requirement described in
(1) as a necessary condition of an ethical judgment will be an
objectively rational judgment in accordance with (2). For I
cannot expect any other rational agents to accept as valid for
them a judgment that I would not accept if I were in their
place; and if two rational agents could not accept each other's
judgments, they could not be rational judgments, for the reason given in (2). To say that I would accept the judgment I
make, even if I were in someone else's position and they in
mine is, however, simply to say that my judgment is one I
can prescribe from a universal point of view. Ethics and reason
both require us to rise above our own particular point of view
and take a perspective from which our own personal identity
- the role we happen to occupy - is unimportant. Thus reason
requires us to act on universalisable judgments and, to that
extent, to act ethically.
Is this argument valid? I have already indicated that I accept
the first point, that ethics involves universalisability. The second
318 
?
point also seems undeniable. Reason must be universal. Does
the conclusion therefore follow? Here is the flaw in the argument. The conclusion appears to follow directly from the premises; but this move involves a slide from the limited sense in
which it is true that a rational judgment must be universally
valid, to a stronger sense of 'universally valid' that is equivalent
to universalisability. The difference between these two senses
can be seen by considering a non-universalisable imperative,
like the purely egoistic: 'Let everyone do what is in my interests.'
This differs from the imperative of universalisable egoism - 'Let
everyone do what is in her or his own interests' - because it
contains an ineliminable reference to a particular person. It
therefore cannot be an ethical imperative. Does it also lack the
universality required if it is to be a rational basis for action?
Surely not. Every rational agent could accept that the purely
egoistic activity of other rational agents is rationally justifiable.
Pure egoism could be rationally adopted by everyone.
Let us look at this more closely. It must be conceded that
there is a sense in which one purely egoistic rational agent -
call him Jack - could not accept the practical judgments of
another purely egoistic rational agent - call her Jill. Assuming
Jill's interests differ from Jack's, Jill may be acting rationally in
urging Jack to do A, while Jack is also acting rationally in
deciding against doing A.
This disagreement is, however, compatible with all rational
agents accepting pure egoism. Though they accept pure egoism,
it points them in different directions because they start from
different places. When Jack adopts pure egoism, it leads him to
further his interests and when Jill adopts pure egoism it leads
her to further her interests. Hence the disagreement over what
to do. On the other hand - and this is the sense in which pure
egoism could be accepted as valid by all rational agents - if we
were to ask Jill (off the record and promising not to tell Jack)
what she thinks it would be rational for Jack to do, she would.
319 

if truthful, have to reply that it would be rational for Jack to
do what is in his own interests, rather than what is in her
interests.
So when purely egoistic rational agents oppose each other's
acts, it does not indicate disagreement over the rationality of
pure egoism. Pure egoism, though not a universalisable principle, could be accepted as a rational basis of action by all rational agents. The sense in which rational judgments must be
universally acceptable is weaker than the sense in which ethical
judgements must be. That an action will benefit me rather than
anyone else could be a valid reason for doing it, though it could
not be an ethical reason for doing it.
A consequence of this conclusion is that rational agents may
rationally try to prevent each other from doing what they admit
the other is rationally justified in doing. There is, unfortunately,
nothing paradoxical about this. Two salespeople competing for
an important sale will accept each other's conduct as rational,
though each aims to thwart the other. The same holds of two
soldiers meeting in battle, or two footballers vying for the ball.
Accordingly, this attempted demonstration of a link between
reason and ethics fails. There may be other ways of forging this
link, but it is difficult to see any that hold greater promise of
success. The chief obstacle to be overcome is the nature of practical reason. Long ago David Hume argued that reason in action
applies only to means, not to ends. The ends must be given by
our wants and desires. Hume unflinchingly drew out the implications of this view:
'Tis not contrary to reason to prefer the destruction of the whole
world to the scratching of my finger. Tis not contrary to reason
for me to choose my total ruin, to prevent the least uneasiness
of an Indian or person wholly unknown to me. 'Tis as little
contrary to reason to prefer even my own acknowledged lesser
good to my greater, and have a more ardent affection for the
former than the latter.
320 
?
Extreme as it is, Hume's view of practical reason has stood up
to criticism remarkably well. His central claim - that in practical
reasoning we start from something wanted - is difficult to refute;
yet it must be refuted if any argument is to succeed in showing
that it is rational for all of us to act ethically irrespective of what
we want.
Nor is the refutation of Hume all that is needed for a demonstration of the rational necessity of acting ethically. In The
Possibility of Altruism, Thomas Nagel has argued forcefully that
not to take one's own future desires into account in one's practical deliberations - irrespective of whether one now happens
to desire the satisfaction of those future desires - would indicate
a failure to see oneself as a person existing over time, the present
being merely one time among others in one's life. So it is my
conception of myself as a person that makes it rational for me
to consider my long-term interests. This holds true even if I have
'a more ardent affection' for something that I acknowledge is
not really, all things considered, in my own interest.
Whether Nagel's argument succeeds in vindicating the rationality of prudence is one question: whether a similar argument can also be used in favour of a form of altruism based on
taking the desires of others into account is another question
altogether. Nagel attempts this analogous argument. The role
occupied by 'seeing the present as merely one time among others' is, in the argument for altruism, taken by 'seeing oneself as
merely one person among others'. But whereas it would be
extremely difficult for most of us to cease conceiving of ourselves
as existing over time, with the present merely one time among
others that we will live through, the way we see ourselves as
a person among others is quite different. Henry Sidgwick's observation on this point seems to me exactly right:
It would be contrary to Common Sense to deny that the distinction between any one individual and any other is real and
fundamental, and that consequently 'I' am concerned with the
321 

quality of my existence as an individual in a sense, fundamentally
important, in which I am not concerned with the quality of the
existence of other individuals: and this being so, I do not see
how it can be proved that this distinction is not to be taken as
fundamental in determining the ultimate end of rational action
for an individual.
So it is not only Hume's view of practical reason that stands in
the way of attempts to show that to act rationally is to act
ethically; we might succeed in overthrowing that barrier, only
to find our way blocked by the commonsense distinction between self and others. Taken together, these are formidable
obstacles and I know of no way of overcoming them.
ETHICS AND SELF-INTEREST
If practical reasoning begins with something wanted, to show
that it is rational to act morally would involve showing that in
acting morally we achieve something we want. If, agreeing with
Sidgwick rather than Hume, we hold that it is rational to act
in our long-term interests irrespective of what we happen to
want at the present moment, we could show that it is rational
to act morally by showing that it is in our long-term interests
to do so. There have been many attempts to argue along these
lines, ever since Plato, in The Republic, portrayed Socrates as
arguing that to be virtuous is to have the different elements of
one's personality ordered in a harmonious manner, and this is
necessary for happiness. We shall look at these arguments
shortly; but first it is necessary to assess an objection to this
whole approach to 'Why should I act morally?'
People often say that to defend morality by appealing to selfinterest is to misunderstand what ethics is all about. F. H. Bradley stated this eloquently:
What answer can we give when the question Why should I be
Moral?, in the sense of What will it advantage Me?, is put to
us? Here we shall do well, I think, to avoid all praises of the
322 
?
pleasantness of virtue. We may believe that it transcends all
possible delights of vice, but it would be well to remember that
we desert a moral point of view, that we degrade and prostitute
virtue, when to those who do not love her for herself we bring
ourselves to recommend her for the sake of her pleasures.
In other words, we can never get people to act morally by
providing reasons of self-interest, because if they accept what
we say and act on the reasons given, they will only be acting
self-interestedly, not morally.
One reply to this objection would be that the substance of
the action, what is actually done, is more important than the
motive. People might give money to famine relief because their
friends will think better of them, or they might give the same
amount because they think it their duty. Those saved from starvation by the gift will benefit to the same extent either way.
This is true but crude. It can be made more sophisticated if
it is combined with an appropriate account of the nature and
* function of ethics. Ethics, though not consciously created, is a
product of social life that has the function of promoting values
common to the members of the society. Ethical judgments do
this by praising and encouraging actions in accordance with
these values. Ethical judgments are concerned with motives
because this is a good indication of the tendency of an action
to promote good or evil, but also because it is here that praise
and blame may be effective in altering the tendency of a person's
actions. Conscientiousness (that is, acting for the sake of doing
what is right) is a particularly useful motive, from the community's point of view. People who are conscientious will, if
they accept the values of their society (and if most people did
not accept these values they would not be the values of the
society) always tend to promote what the society values. They
may have no generous or sympathetic inclinations, but if they
think it their duty to give famine relief, they will do so. Moreover, those motivated by the desire to do what is right can be
relied upon to act as they think right in all circumstances,
323 

whereas those who act from some other motive, like selfinterest, will only do what they think right when they believe
it will also be in their interest. Conscientiousness is thus a kind
of multipurpose gap-filler that can be used to motivate people
towards whatever is valued, even if the natural virtues normally
associated with action in accordance with those values (generosity, sympathy, honesty, tolerance, humility, and so on) are
lacking. (This needs some qualification: a conscientious mother
may provide as well for her children as a mother who loves
them, but she cannot love them because it is the right thing to
do. Sometimes conscientiousness is a poor substitute for the real
thing.)
On this view of ethics it is still results, not motives, that really
matter. Conscientiousness is of value because of its consequences. Yet, unlike, say, benevolence, conscientiousness can
be praised and encouraged only for its own sake. To praise a
conscientious act for its consequences would be to praise not
conscientiousness, but something else altogether. If we appeal
to sympathy or self-interest as a reason for doing one's duty,
then we are not encouraging people to do their duty for its own
sake. If conscientiousness is to be encouraged, it must be thought
of as good for its own sake.
It is different in the case of an act done from a motive that
people act upon irrespective of praise and encouragement. The
use of ethical language is then inappropriate. We do not normally say that people ought to do, or that it is their duty to do,
whatever gives them the greatest pleasure, for most people are
sufficiently motivated to do this anyway. So, whereas we praise
good acts done for the sake of doing what is right, we withhold
our praise when we believe the act was done from some motive
like self-interest.
This emphasis on motives and on the moral worth of doing
right for its own sake is now embedded in our notion of ethics.
To the extent that it is so embedded, we will feel that to provide
324 
?
considerations of self-interest for doing what is right is to empty
the action of its moral worth.
My suggestion is that our notion of ethics has -become misleading to the extent that moral worth is attributed only to action
done because it is right, without any ulterior motive. It is understandable, and from the point of view of society perhaps
even desirable, that this attitude should prevail; nevertheless,
those who accept this view of ethics, and are led by it to do
what is right because it is right, without asking for any further
reason, are falling victim to a kind of confidence trick - though
not, of course, a consciously perpetrated one.
That this view of ethics is unjustifiable has already been indicated by the failure of the argument discussed earlier in this
chapter for a rational justification of ethics. In the history of
Western philosophy, no one has urged more strongly than Kant
that our ordinary moral consciousness finds moral worth only
when duty is done for duty's sake. Yet Kant himself saw that
without a rational justification this common conception of ethics
would be 'a mere phantom of the brain'. And this is indeed the
case. If we reject - as in general terms we have done - the
Kantian justification of the rationality of ethics, but try to retain
the Kantian conception of ethics, ethics is left hanging without
support. It becomes a closed system, a system that cannot be
questioned because its first premise - that only action done
because it is right has any moral worth - rules out the only
remaining possible justification for accepting this very premise.
Morality is, on this view, no more rational an end than any
other allegedly self-justifying practice, like etiquette or the kind
of religious faith that comes only to those who first set aside all
sceptical doubts.
Taken as a view of ethics as a whole, we should abandon this
Kantian notion of ethics. This does not mean, however, that
we should never do what we see to be right simply because we
see it to be right, without further reasons. Here we need to
325 

appeal to the distinction Hare has made between intuitive and
critical thinking. When I stand back from my day-to-day ethical
decisions and ask why I should act ethically, I should seek
reasons in the broadest sense, and not allow Kantian preconceptions to deter me from considering self-interested reasons
for living an ethical life. If my search is successful it will provide
me with reasons for taking up the ethical point of view as a
settled policy, a way of living. I would not then ask, in my dayto-day ethical decision making, whether each particular right
action is in my interests. Instead I do it because I see myself as
an ethical person. In everyday situations, I will simply assume
that doing what is right is in my interests, and once I have
decided what is right, I will go ahead and do it, without thinking
about further reasons for doing what is right. To deliberate over
the ultimate reasons for doing what is right in each case would
impossibly complicate my life; it would also be inadvisable because in particular situations I might be too greatly influenced
by strong but temporary desires and inclinations and so make
decisions I would later regret.
That, at least, is how a justification of ethics in terms of selfinterest might work, without defeating its own aim. We can
now ask if such a justification exists. There is a daunting list of
those who, following Plato's lead, have offered one: Aristotle,
Aquinas, Spinoza, Butler, Hegel, even - for all his strictures
against prostituting virtue - Bradley. Like Plato, these philosophers made broad claims about human nature and the conditions under which human beings can be happy. Some were
also able to fall back on a belief that virtue will be rewarded
and wickedness punished in a life after our bodily death. Philosophers cannot use this argument if they want to carry conviction nowadays; nor can they adopt sweeping psychological
theories on the basis of their own general experience of their
fellows, as philosophers used to do when psychology was a
branch of philosophy.
It might be said that since philosophers are not empirical
326 
?
scientists, discussion of the connection between acting ethically
and living a fulfilled and happy life should be left to psychologists, sociologists, and other appropriate experts. The question
is not, however, dealt with by any other single discipline and
its relevance to practical ethics is reason enough for our looking
into it.
What facts about human nature could show that ethics and
self- interest coincide? One theory is that we all have benevolent
or sympathetic inclinations that make us concerned about the
welfare of others. Another relies on a natural conscience that
gives rise to guilt feelings when we do what we know to be
wrong. But how strong are these benevolent desires or feelings
of guilt? Is it possible to suppress them? If so, isn't it possible
that in a world in which humans and other animals are suffering
in great numbers, suppressing one's conscience and sympathy
for others is the surest way to happiness?
To meet this objection those who would link ethics and happiness must assert that we cannot be happy if these elements
of our nature are suppressed. Benevolence and sympathy, they
might argue, are tied up with the capacity to take part in friendly
or loving relations with others, and there can be no real happiness without such relationships. For the same reason it is
necessary to take at least some ethical standards seriously, and
to be open and honest in living by them - for a life of deception
and dishonesty is a furtive life, in which the possibility of discovery always clouds the horizon. Genuine acceptance of ethical
standards is likely to mean that we feel some guilt - or at least
that we are less pleased with ourselves than we otherwise would
be — when we do not live up to them.
These claims about the connection between our character and
our prospects of happiness are no more than hypotheses. Attempts to confirm them by detailed research are sparse and
inadequate. A. H. Maslow, an American psychologist, asserted
that human beings have a need for self-actualisation that involves growing towards courage, kindness, knowledge, love,
327 

honesty, and unselfishness. When we fulfil this need, we feel
serene, joyful, filled with zest, sometimes euphoric, and generally happy. When we act contrary to our need for selfactualisation, we experience anxiety, despair, boredom, shame,
emptiness and are generally unable to enjoy ourselves. It would
be nice if Maslow should turn out to be right; unfortunately,
the data Maslow produced in support of his theory consisted of
limited studies of selected people and cannot be considered
anything more than suggestive.
Human nature is so diverse that one may doubt if any generalisation about the kind of character that leads to happiness
could hold for all human beings. What, for instance, of those
we call 'psychopaths'? Psychiatrists use this term as a label for
a person who is asocial, impulsive, egocentric, unemotional,
lacking in feelings of remorse, shame, or guilt, and apparently
unable to form deep and enduring personal relationships. Psychopaths are certainly abnormal, but whether it is proper to say
that they are mentally ill is another matter. At least on the
surface, they do not suffer from their condition, and it is not
obvious that it is in their interest to be 'cured'. Hervey Cleckley,
the author of a classic study of psychopathy entitled The Mask
of Sanity, notes that since his book was first published he has
received countless letters from people desperate for help - but
they are from the parents, spouses, and other relatives of psychopaths, almost never from the psychopaths themselves. This
is not surprising, for while psychopaths are asocial and indifferent to the welfare of others, they seem to enjoy life. Psychopaths often appear to be charming, intelligent people, with no
delusions or other signs of irrational thinking. When interviewed they say things like: 'A lot has happened to me, a lot
more will happen. But I enjoy living and I am always looking
forward to each day. I like laughing and I've done a lot. I am
essentially a clown at heart - but a happy one. I always take
the bad with the good.' There is no effective therapy for psychopathy, which may be explained by the fact that psychopaths
328 
?
see nothing wrong with their behaviour and often find it extremely rewarding, at least in the short term. Of course their
impulsive nature and lack of a sense of shame or guilt means
that some psychopaths end up in prison, though it is hard to
tell how many do not, since those who avoid prison are also
more likely to avoid contact with psychiatrists. Studies have
shown that a surprisingly large number of psychopaths are able
to avoid prison despite grossly antisocial behaviour, probably
because of their well-known ability to convince others that they
are truly repentant, that it will never happen again, that they
deserve another chance, and so forth.
The existence of psychopathic people counts against the contention that benevolence, sympathy, and feelings of guilt are
present in everyone. It also appears to count against attempts
to link happiness with the possession of these inclinations. But
let us pause before we accept this latter conclusion. Must we
accept psychopaths' own evaluations of their happiness? They
are, after all, notoriously persuasive liars. Moreover, even if they
are telling the truth as they see it, are they qualified to say that
they are really happy, when they seem unable to experience
the emdtional states that play such a large part in the happiness
and fulfilment of more normal people? Admittedly, a psychopath could use the same argument against us: how can we say
that we are truly happy when we have not experienced the
excitement and freedom that comes from complete irresponsibility? Since we cannot enter into the subjective states of psychopathic people, nor they into ours, the dispute is not easy to
resolve.
Cleckley suggests that the psychopaths' behaviour can be explained as a response to the meaninglessness of their lives. It is
characteristic of psychopaths to work for a while at a job and
then just when their ability and charm have taken them to the
crest of success, commit some petty and easily detectable crime.
A similar pattern occurs in their personal relationships. (There
is support to be found here for Thomas Nagel's account of im329 

prudence as rational only if one fails to see oneself as a person
existing over time, with the present merely one among other
times one will live through. Certainly psychopathic people live
largely in the present and lack any coherent life plan.)
Cleckley explains this erratic and to us inadequately motivated behaviour by likening the psychopath's life to that of
children forced to sit through a performance of King Lear. Children are restless and misbehave under these conditions because
they cannot enjoy the play as adults do. They act to relieve
boredom. Similarly, Cleckley says, psychopaths are bored because their emotional poverty means that they cannot take interest in, or gain satisfaction from, what for others are the most
important things in life: love, family, success in business or
professional life, and the like. These things simply do not matter
to them. Their unpredictable and antisocial behaviour is an
attempt to relieve what would otherwise be a tedious existence.
These claims are speculative and Cleckley admits that they may
not be possible to establish scientifically. They do suggest, however, an aspect of the psychopath's life that undermines the
otherwise attractive nature of the psychopath's free-wheeling
life. Most reflective people, at some time or other, want their
life to have some kind of meaning. Few of us could deliberately
choose a way of life that we regarded as utterly meaningless.
For this reason most of us would not choose to live a psychopathic life, however enjoyable it might be.
Yet there is something paradoxical about criticising the psychopath's life for its meaninglessness. Don't we have to accept,
in the absence of religious belief, that life really is meaningless,
not just for the psychopath but for all of us? And if this is so,
why should we not choose - if it were in our power to choose
our personality - the life of a psychopath? But is it true that,
religion aside, life is meaningless? Now our pursuit of reasons
for acting morally has led us to what is often regarded as the
ultimate philosophical question.
330 
?
HAS LIFE A MEANING?
In what sense does rejection of belief in a god imply rejection
of the view that life has any meaning? If this world had been
created by some divine being with a particular goal in mind, it
could be said to have a meaning, at least for that divine being.
If we could know what the divine being's purpose in creating
us was, we could then know what the meaning of our life was
for our creator. If we accepted our creator's purpose (though
why we should do that would need to be explained) we could
claim to know the meaning of life.
When we reject belief in a god we must give up the idea that
life on this planet has some preordained meaning. Life as a whole
has no meaning. Life began, as the best available theories tell
us, in a chance combination of molecules; it then evolved
through random mutations and natural selection. All this just
happened; it did not happen for any overall purpose. Now that
it has resulted in the existence of beings who prefer some states
of affairs to others, however, it may be possible for particular
lives to be meaningful. In this sense atheists can find meaning
in life.
Let us return to the comparison between the life of a psychopath and that of a more normal person. Why should the
psychopath's life not be meaningful? We have seen that psychopaths are egocentric to an extreme: neither other people,
nor worldly success, nor anything else really matters to them.
But why is their own enjoyment of life not sufficient to give
meaning to their lives?
Most of us would not be able to find happiness by deliberately
setting out to enjoy ourselves without caring about anyone or
anything else. The pleasures we obtained in that way would
seem empty and would soon pall. We seek a meaning for our
lives beyond our own pleasures and find fulfilment and happiness in doing what we see to be meaningful. If our life has
331 

no meaning other than our own happiness, we are likely to find
that when we have obtained what we think we need to be
happy, happiness itself still eludes us.
That those who aim at happiness for happiness's sake often
fail to find it, while others find happiness in pursuing altogether
different goals, has been called 'the paradox of hedonism'. It is
not, of course, a logical paradox but a claim about the way in
which we come to be happy. Like other generalisations on this
subject, it lacks empirical confirmation. Yet it matches our everyday observations and is consistent with our nature as evolved,
purposive beings. Human beings survive and reproduce themselves through purposive action. We obtain happiness and fulfilment by working towards and achieving our goals. In
evolutionary terms we could say that happiness functions as an
internal reward for our achievements. Subjectively, we regard
achieving the goal (or progressing towards it) as a reason for
happiness. Our own happiness, therefore, is a by-product of
aiming at something else, and not to be obtained by setting our
sights on happiness alone.
The psychopath's life can now be seen to be meaningless in
a way that a normal life is not. It is meaningless because it looks
inward to the pleasures of the present moment and not outward
to anything more long-term or far-reaching. More normal lives
have meaning because they are lived to some larger purpose.
All this is speculative. You may accept or reject it to the extent
that it agrees with your own observation and introspection. My
next - and final - suggestion is more speculative still. It is that
to find an enduring meaning in our lives it is not enough to go
beyond psychopaths who have no long-term commitments or
life plans; we must also go beyond more prudent egoists who
have long term plans concerned only with their own interests.
The prudent egoists may find meaning in their lives for a time,
for they have the purpose of furthering their own interests; but
what, in the end, does that amount to? When everything in
our interests has been achieved, do we just sit back and be
332 
?
happy? Could we be happy in this way? Or would we decide
that we had still not quite reached our target, that there was
something else we needed before we could sit back and enjoy
it all? Most materially successful egoists take the latter route,
thus escaping the necessity of admitting that they cannot find
happiness in permanent holidaying. People who slaved to establish small businesses, telling themselves they would do it
only until they had made enough to live comfortably, keep
working long after they have passed their original target. Their
material 'needs' expand just fast enough to keep ahead of their
income.
The 1980s, the 'decade of greed', provided plenty of examples
of the insatiable nature of the desire for wealth. In 1985 Dennis
Levine was a highly successful Wall Street banker with the
fastest-growing and most talked-about Wall Street firm, Drexel
Bumham Lambert. But Levine was not satisfied:
When I was earning $20,000 a year, I thought, I can make
$100,000. When I was earning $100,000 a year, I thought, I can
make $200,000. When I was making $1 million, I thought, I can
make $3 million. There was always somebody one rung higher
on the ladder, and I could never stop wondering: Is he really
twice as good as I am.
Levine decided to take matters into his own hands and arranged
with friends at other Wall Street firms to exchange confidential
information that would allow them to profit by buying shares
in companies that were about to become takeover targets. By
this method Levine made an additional $11 million, on top of
what he earned in salary and bonuses. He also ended up bringing
about his own ruin, and spending time in prison. That, however,
is not the relevant point here. No doubt some who use inside
information to make millions of dollars do not get caught. What
is less certain, however, is that they really find satisfaction and
fulfilment in having more money.
Now we begin to see where ethics comes into the problem
of living a meaningful life. If we are looking for a purpose
333 

broader than our own interests, something that will allow us
to see our lives as possessing significance beyond the narrow
confines of our own conscious states, one obvious solution is
to take up the ethical point of view. The ethical point of view
does, as we have seen, require us to go beyond a personal point
of view to the standpoint of an impartial spectator. Thus looking
at things ethically is a way of transcending our inward-looking
concerns and identifying ourselves with the most objective point
of view possible - with, as Sidgwick put it, 'the point of view
of the universe'.
The point of view of the universe is a lofty standpoint. In the
rarefied air that surrounds it we may get carried away into
talking, as Kant does, of the moral point of view, 'inevitably'
humbling all who compare their own limited nature with it. I
do not want to suggest anything as sweeping as this. Earlier in
this chapter, in rejecting Thomas Nagel's argument for the rationality of altruism, I said that there is nothing irrational about
being concerned with the quality of one's own existence in a
way that one is not concerned with the quality of existence of
other individuals. Without going back on this, I am now suggesting that rationality, in the broad sense that includes selfawareness and reflection on the nature and point of our own
existence, may push us towards concerns broader than the quality of our own existence; but the process is not a necessary one
and those who do not take part in it - or, who in taking part,
do not follow it all the way to the ethical point of view - are
neither irrational nor in error. Psychopaths, for all I know, may
simply be unable to obtain as much happiness through caring
about others as they obtain by antisocial acts. Other people find
collecting stamps an entirely adequate way of giving purpose
to their lives. There is nothing irrational about that; but others
again grow out of stamp collecting as they become more aware
of their situation in the world and more reflective about their
purposes. To this third group the ethical point of view offers a
meaning and purpose in life that one does not grow out of.
334 
?
(At least, one cannot grow out of the ethical point of view
until all ethical tasks have been accomplished. If that Utopia
were ever achieved, our purposive nature might well leave us
dissatisfied, much as egoists might be dissatisfied when they
have everything they need to be happy. There is nothing paradoxical about this, for we should not expect evolution to have
equipped us, in advance, with the ability to enjoy a situation
that has never previously occurred. Nor is this going to be a
practical problem in the near future.)
'Why act morally?' cannot be given an answer that will provide everyone with overwhelming reasons for acting morally.
Ethically indefensible behaviour is not always irrational. We
will probably always need the sanctions of the law and social
pressure to provide additional reasons against serious violations
of ethical standards. At the same time, those reflective enough
to ask the question we have been discussing in this chapter are
also those most likely to appreciate the reasons that can be
offered for taking the ethical point of view

## SECOND BOOK: PRINCIPLES AND MORALS

 Nature has placed mankind under the governance of two sovereign masters, pain and pleasure. It is for them alone to point out what we ought to do, as well as to determine what we shall do. On the one hand the standard of right and wrong, on the other the chain of causes and effects, are fastened to their throne. They govern us in all we do, in all we say, in all we think: every effort we can make to throw off our subjection, will serve but to demonstrate and confirm it. In words a man may pretend to abjure their empire: but in reality he will remain subject to it all the while. The principle of utility
6
 recognizes this subjection, and assumes it for the foundation of that system, the object of which is to rear the fabric of felicity by the hands of reason and of law. Systems which attempt to question it, deal in sounds instead of sense, in caprice instead of reason, in darkness instead of light.

But enough of metaphor and declamation: it is not by such means that moral science is to be improved.

 The principle of utility is the foundation of the present work: it will be proper therefore at the outset to give an explicit and determinate account of what is meant by it. By the principle
7
 of utility is meant that principle which approves or disapproves of every action whatsoever, according to the tendency it appears to have to augment or diminish the happiness of the party whose interest is in question: or, what is the same thing in other words, to promote or to oppose that happiness. I say of every action whatsoever, and therefore not only of every action of a private individual, but of every measure of government.

 By utility is meant that property in any object, whereby it tends to produce benefit, advantage, pleasure, good, or happiness, (all this in the present case comes to the same thing) or (what comes again to the same thing) to prevent the happening of mischief, pain, evil, or unhappiness to the party whose interest is considered: if that party be the community in general, then the happiness of the community: if a particular individual, then the happiness of that individual.

 The interest of the community is one of the most general expressions that can occur in the phraseology of morals: no wonder that the meaning of it is often lost. When it has a meaning, it is this. The community is a fictitious body, composed of the individual persons who are considered as constituting as it were its members. The interest of the community then is, what?—the sum of the interests of the several members who compose it.

 It is in vain to talk of the interest of the community, without understanding what is the interest of the individual.
8
 A thing is said to promote the interest, or to be for the interest, of an individual, when it tends to add to the sum total of his pleasures: or, what comes to the same thing, to diminish the sum total of his pains.

 An action then may be said to be conformable to the principle of utility, or, for shortness sake, to utility, (meaning with respect to the community at large) when the tendency it has to augment the happiness of the community is greater than any it has to diminish it.

 A measure of government (which is but a particular kind of action, performed by a particular person or persons) may be said to be conformable to or dictated by the principle of utility, when in like manner the tendency which it has to augment the happiness of the community is greater than any which it has to diminish it.

 When an action, or in particular a measure of government, is supposed by a man to be conformable to the principle of utility, it may be convenient, for the purposes of discourse, to imagine a kind of law or dictate, called a law or dictate of utility: and to speak of the action in question, as being conformable to such law or dictate.

 A man may be said to be a partizan of the principle of utility, when the approbation or disapprobation he annexes to any action, or to any measure, is determined by and proportioned to the tendency which he conceives it to have to augment or to diminish the happiness of the community: or in other words, to its conformity or unconformity to the laws or dictates of utility.

 Of an action that is conformable to the principle of utility one may always say either that it is one that ought to be done, or at least that it is not one that ought not to be done. One may say also, that it is right it should be done; at least that it is not wrong it should be done: that it is a right action; at least that it is not a wrong action. When thus interpreted, the words ought, and right and wrong and others of that stamp, have a meaning: when otherwise, they have none.

 Has the rectitude of this principle been ever formally contested? It should seem that it had, by those who have not known what they have been meaning. Is it susceptible of any direct proof? it should seem not: for that which is used to prove every thing else, cannot itself be proved: a chain of proofs must have their commencement somewhere. To give such proof is as impossible as it is needless.

 Not that there is or ever has been that human creature at breathing, however stupid or perverse, who has not on many, perhaps on most occasions of his life, deferred to it. By the natural constitution of the human frame, on most occasions of their lives men in general embrace this principle, without thinking of it: if not for the ordering of their own actions, yet for the trying of their own actions, as well as of those of other men. There have been, at the same time, not many perhaps, even of the most intelligent, who have been disposed to embrace it purely and without reserve. There are even few who have not taken some occasion or other to quarrel with it, either on account of their not understanding always how to apply it, or on account of some prejudice or other which they were afraid to examine into, or could not bear to part with. For such is the stuff that man is made of: in principle and in practice, in a right track and in a wrong one, the rarest of all human qualities is consistency.

 When a man attempts to combat the principle of utility, it is with reasons drawn, without his being aware of it, from that very principle itself.
9
 His arguments, if they prove any thing, prove not that the principle is wrong, but that, according to the applications he supposes to be made of it, it is misapplied. Is it possible for a man to move the earth? Yes; but he must first find out another earth to stand upon.

 To disprove the propriety of it by arguments is impossible; but, from the causes that have been mentioned, or from some confused or partial view of it, a man may happen to be disposed not to relish it. Where this is the case, if he thinks the settling of his opinions on such a subject worth the trouble, let him take the following steps, and at length, perhaps, he may come to reconcile himself to it.

1. Let him settle with himself, whether he would wish to discard this principle altogether; if so, let him consider what it is that all his reasonings (in matters of politics especially) can amount to?

2. If he would, let him settle with himself, whether he would judge and act without any principle, or whether there is any other he would judge an act by?

3. If there be, let him examine and satisfy himself whether the principle he thinks he has found is really any separate intelligible principle; or whether it be not a mere principle in words, a kind of phrase, which at bottom expresses neither more nor less than the mere averment of his own unfounded sentiments; that is, what in another person he might be apt to call caprice?

4. If he is inclined to think that his own approbation or disapprobation, annexed to the idea of an act, without any regard to its consequences, is a sufficient foundation for him to judge and act upon, let him ask himself whether his sentiment is to be a standard of right and wrong, with respect to every other man, or whether every man's sentiment has the same privilege of being a standard to itself?

5. In the first case, let him ask himself whether his principle is not despotical, and hostile to all the rest of human race?

6. In the second case, whether it is not anarchial, and whether at this rate there are not as many different standards of right and wrong as there are men? and whether even to the same man, the same thing, which is right to-day, may not (without the least change in its nature) be wrong to-morrow? and whether the same thing is not right and wrong in the same place at the same time? and in either case, whether all argument is not at an end? and whether, when two men have said, 'I like this', and 'I don't like it', they can (upon such a principle) have any thing more to say?

7. If he should have said to himself, No: for that the sentiment which he proposes as a standard must be grounded on reflection, let him say on what particulars the reflection is to turn? if on particulars having relation to the utility of the act, then let him say whether this is not deserting his own principle, and borrowing assistance from that very one in opposition to which he sets it up: or if not on those particulars, on what other particulars?

8. If he should be for compounding the matter, and adopting his own principle in part, and the principle of utility in part, let him say how far he will adopt it?

9. When he has settled with himself where he will stop, then let him ask himself how he justifies to himself the adopting it so far? and why he will not adopt it any farther?

10. Admitting any other principle than the principle of utility to be a right principle, a principle that it is right for a man to pursue; admitting (what is not true) that the word right can have a meaning without reference to utility, let him say whether there is any such thing as a motive that a man can have to pursue the dictates of it: if there is, let him say what that motive is, and how it is to be distinguished from those which enforce the dictates of utility: if not, then lastly let him say what it is this other principle can be good for?

Chapter II: OF PRINCIPLES ADVERSE TO THAT OF UTILITY
1. If the principle of utility be a right principle to be governed by, and that in all cases, it follows from what has been just observed, that whatever principle differs from it in any case must necessarily be a wrong one. To prove any other principle, therefore, to be a wrong one, there needs no more than just to show it to be what it is, a principle of which the dictates are in some point or other different from those of the principle of utility: to state it is to confute it.

 A principle may be different from that of utility in two ways: 1. By being constantly opposed to it: this is the case with a principle which may be termed the principle of asceticism.
10
 2. By being sometimes opposed to it, and sometimes not, as it may happen: this is the case with another, which may be termed the principle of sympathy and antipathy.

 By the principle of asceticism I mean that principle, which, like the principle of utility, approves or disapproves of any action, according to the tendency which it appears to have to augment or diminish the happiness of the party whose interest is in question; but in an inverse manner: approving of actions in as far as they tend to diminish his happiness; disapproving of them in as far as they tend to augment it.

 It is evident that any one who reprobates any the least particle of pleasure, as such, from whatever source derived, is pro tanto a partizan of the principle of asceticism. It is only upon that principle, and not from the principle of utility, that the most abominable pleasure which the vilest of malefactors ever reaped from his crime would be to be reprobated, if it stood alone. The case is, that it never does stand alone; but is necessarily followed by such a quantity of pain (or, what comes to the same thing, such a chance for a certain quantity of pain) that the pleasure in comparison of it, is as nothing: and this is the true and sole, but perfectly sufficient, reason for making it a ground for punishment.

 There are two classes of men of very different complexions, by whom the principle of asceticism appears to have been embraced; the one a set of moralists, the other a set of religionists. Different accordingly have been the motives which appear to have recommended it to the notice of these different parties. Hope, that is the prospect of pleasure, seems to have animated the former: hope, the aliment of philosophic pride: the hope of honour and reputation at the hands of men. Fear, that is the prospect of pain, the latter: fear, the offspring of superstitious fancy: the fear of future punishment at the hands of a splenetic and revengeful Deity. I say in this case fear: for of the invisible future, fear is more powerful than hope. These circumstances characterize the two different parties among the partisans of the principle of asceticism; the parties and their motives different, the principle the same.

 The religious party, however, appear to have carried it farther than the philosophical: they have acted more consistently and less wisely. The philosophical party have scarcely gone farther than to reprobate pleasure: the religious party have frequently gone so far as to make it a matter of merit and of duty to court pain. The philosophical party have hardly gone farther than the making pain a matter of indifference. It is no evil, they have said: they have not said, it is a good. They have not so much as reprobated all pleasure in the lump. They have discarded only what they have called the gross; that is, such as are organical, or of which the origin is easily traced up to such as are organical: they have even cherished and magnified the refined. Yet this, however, not under the name of pleasure: to cleanse itself from the sordes of its impure original, it was necessary it should change its name: the honourable, the glorious, the reputable, the becoming, the honestum, the decorum it was to be called: in short, any thing but pleasure.

 From these two sources have flowed the doctrines from which the sentiments of the bulk of mankind have all along received a tincture of this principle; some from the philosophical, some from the religious, some from both. Men of education more frequently from the philosophical, as more suited to the elevation of their sentiments: the vulgar more frequently from the superstitious, as more suited to the narrowness of their intellect, undilated by knowledge: and to the abjectness of their condition, continually open to the attacks of fear. The tinctures, however, derived from the two sources, would naturally intermingle, insomuch that a man would not always know by which of them he was most influenced: and they would often serve to corroborate and enliven one another. It was this conformity that made a kind of alliance between parties of a complexion otherwise so dissimilar: and disposed them to unite upon various occasions against the common enemy, the partizan of the principle of utility, whom they joined in branding with the odious name of Epicurean.

 The principle of asceticism, however, with whatever warmth it may have been embraced by its partizans as a rule of private conduct, seems not to have been carried to any considerable length, when applied to the business of government. In a few instances it has been carried a little way by the philosophical party: witness the Spartan regimen. Though then, perhaps, it maybe considered as having been a measure of security: and an application, though a precipitate and perverse application, of the principle of utility. Scarcely in any instances, to any considerable length, by the religious: for the various monastic orders, and the societies of the Quakers, Dumplers, Moravians, and other religionists, have been free societies, whose regimen no man has been astricted to without the intervention of his own consent. Whatever merit a man may have thought there would be in making himself miserable, no such notion seems ever to have occurred to any of them, that it may be a merit, much less a duty, to make others miserable: although it should seem, that if a certain quantity of misery were a thing so desirable, it would not matter much whether it were brought by each man upon himself, or by one man upon another. It is true, that from the same source from whence, among the religionists, the attachment to the principle of asceticism took its rise, flowed other doctrines and practices, from which misery in abundance was produced in one man by the instrumentality of another: witness the holy wars, and the persecutions for religion. But the passion for producing misery in these cases proceeded upon some special ground: the exercise of it was confined to persons of particular descriptions: they were tormented, not as men, but as heretics and infidels. To have inflicted the same miseries on their fellow believers and fellow-sectaries, would have been as blameable in the eyes even of these religionists, as in those of a partizan of the principle of utility. For a man to give himself a certain number of stripes was indeed meritorious: but to give the same number of stripes to another man, not consenting, would have been a sin. We read of saints, who for the good of their souls, and the mortification of their bodies, have voluntarily yielded themselves a prey to vermin: but though many persons of this class have wielded the reins of empire, we read of none who have set themselves to work, and made laws on purpose, with a view of stocking the body politic with the breed of highwaymen, housebreakers, or incendiaries. If at any time they have suffered the nation to be preyed upon by swarms of idle pensioners, or useless placemen, it has rather been from negligence and imbecility, than from any settled plan for oppressing and plundering of the people. If at any time they have sapped the sources of national wealth, by cramping commerce, and driving the inhabitants into emigration, it has been with other views, and in pursuit of other ends. If they have declaimed against the pursuit of pleasure, and the use of wealth, they have commonly stopped at declamation: they have not, like Lycurgus, made express ordinances for the purpose of banishing the precious metals. If they have established idleness by a law, it has been not because idleness, the mother of vice and misery, is itself a virtue, but because idleness (say they) is the road to holiness. If under the notion of fasting, they have joined in the plan of confining their subjects to a diet, thought by some to be of the most nourishing and prolific nature, it has been not for the sake of making them tributaries to the nations by whom that diet was to be supplied, but for the sake of manifesting their own power, and exercising the obedience of the people. If they have established, or suffered to be established, punishments for the breach of celibacy, they have done no more than comply with the petitions of those deluded rigorists, who, dupes to the ambitious and deep-laid policy of their rulers, first laid themselves under that idle obligation by a vow.

 The principle of asceticism seems originally to have been the reverie of certain hasty speculators, who having perceived, or fancied, that certain pleasures, when reaped in certain circumstances, have, at the long run, been attended with pains more than equivalent to them, took occasion to quarrel with every thing that offered itself under the name of pleasure. Having then got thus far, and having forgot the point which they set out from, they pushed on, and went so much further as to think it meritorious to fall in love with pain. Even this, we see, is at bottom but the principle of utility misapplied.

 The principle of utility is capable of being consistently pursued; and it is but tautology to say, that the more consistently it is pursued, the better it must ever be for human-kind. The principle of asceticism never was, nor ever can be, consistently pursued by any living creature. Let but one tenth part of the inhabitants of this earth pursue it consistently, and in a day's time they will have turned it into a hell.

 Among principles adverse
11
 to that of utility, that which at this day seems to have most influence in matters of government, is what may be called the principle of sympathy and antipathy. By the principle of sympathy and antipathy, I mean that principle which approves or disapproves of certain actions, not on account of their tending to augment the happiness, nor yet on account of their tending to diminish the happiness of the party whose interest is in question, but merely because a man finds himself disposed to approve or disapprove of them: holding up that approbation or disapprobation as a sufficient reason for itself, and disclaiming the necessity of looking out for any extrinsic ground. Thus far in the general department of morals: and in the particular department of politics, measuring out the quantum (as well as determining the ground) of punishment, by the degree of the disapprobation.

 It is manifest, that this is rather a principle in name than in reality: it is not a positive principle of itself, so much as a term employed to signify the negation of all principle. What one expects to find in a principle is something that points out some external consideration, as a means of warranting and guiding the internal sentiments of approbation and disapprobation: this expectation is but ill fulfilled by a proposition, which does neither more nor less than hold up each of those sentiments as a ground and standard for itself.

 In looking over the catalogue of human actions (says a partizan of this principle) in order to determine which of them are to be marked with the seal of disapprobation, you need but to take counsel of your own feelings: whatever you find in yourself a propensity to condemn, is wrong for that very reason. For the same reason it is also meet for punishment: in what proportion it is adverse to utility, or whether it be adverse to utility at all, is a matter that makes no difference. In that same proportion also is it meet for punishment: if you hate much, punish much: if you hate little, punish little: punish as you hate. If you hate not at all, punish not at all: the fine feelings of the soul are not to be overborne and tyrannized by the harsh and rugged dictates of political utility.

 The various systems that have been formed concerning the standard of right may all be reduced to the principle of sympathy and antipathy. One account may serve for all of them. They consist all of them in so many contrivances for avoiding the obligation of appealing to any external standard, and for prevailing upon the reader to accept of the author's sentiment or opinion as a reason for itself. The phrases different, but the principle the same.
12

 It is manifest, that the dictates of this principle will frequently coincide with those of utility, though perhaps without intending any such thing. Probably more frequently than not: and hence it is that the business of penal justice is carried upon that tolerable sort of footing upon which we see it carried on in common at this day. For what more natural or more general ground of hatred to a practice can there be, than the mischievousness of such practice? What all men are exposed to suffer by, all men will be disposed to hate. It is far yet, however, from being a constant ground: for when a man suffers, it is not always that he knows what it is he suffers by. A man may suffer grievously, for instance, by a new tax, without being able to trace up the cause of his sufferings to the injustice of some neighbour, who has eluded the payment of an old one.

 The principle of sympathy and antipathy is most apt to err on the side of severity. It is for applying punishment in many cases which deserve none: in many cases which deserve some, it is for applying more than they deserve. There is no incident imaginable, be it ever so trivial, and so remote from mischief, from which this principle may not extract a ground of punishment. Any difference in taste: any difference in opinion: upon one subject as well as upon another. No disagreement so trifling which perseverance and altercation will not render serious. Each becomes in the other's eyes an enemy, and, if laws permit, a criminal.
13
 This is one of the circumstances by which the human race is distinguished (not much indeed to its advantage) from the brute creation.

 It is not, however, by any means unexampled for this principle to err on the side of lenity. A near and perceptible mischief moves antipathy. A remote and imperceptible mischief, though not less real, has no effect. Instances in proof of this will occur in numbers in the course of the work.
14
 It would be breaking in upon the order of it to give them here.

 It may be wondered, perhaps, that in all this no mention has been made of the theological principle; meaning that principal which professes to recur for the standard of right and wrong to the will of God. But the case is, this is not in fact a distinct principle. It is never any thing more or less than one or other of the three before-mentioned principles presenting itself under another shape. The will of God here meant cannot be his revealed will, as contained in the sacred writings: for that is a system which nobody ever thinks of recurring to at this time of day, for the details of political administration: and even before it can be applied to the details of private conduct, it is universally allowed, by the most eminent divines of all persuasions, to stand in need of pretty ample interpretations; else to what use are the works of those divines? And for the guidance of these interpretations, it is also allowed, that some other standard must be assumed. The will then which is meant on this occasion, is that which may be called the presumptive will: that is to say, that which is presumed to be his will by virtue of the conformity of its dictates to those of some other principle. What then may be this other principle? it must be one or other of the three mentioned above: for there cannot, as we have seen, be any more. It is plain, therefore, that, setting revelation out of the question, no light can ever be thrown upon the standard of right and wrong, by any thing that can be said upon the question, what is God's will. We may be perfectly sure, indeed, that whatever is right is conformable to the will of God: but so far is that from answering the purpose of showing us what is right, that it is necessary to know first whether a thing is right, in order to know from thence whether it be conformable to the will of God.
15

 There are two things which are very apt to be confounded, but which it imports us carefully to distinguish:—the motive or cause, which, by operating on the mind of an individual, is productive of any act: and the ground or reason which warrants a legislator, or other by-stander, in regarding that act with an eye of approbation. When the act happens, in the particular instance in question, to be productive of effects which we approve of, much more if we happen to observe that the same motive may frequently be productive, in other instances, of the like effects, we are apt to transfer our approbation to the motive itself, and to assume, as the just ground for the approbation we bestow on the act, the circumstance of its originating from that motive. It is in this way that the sentiment of antipathy has often been considered as a just ground of action. Antipathy, for instance, in such or such a case, is the cause of an action which is attended with good effects: but this does not make it a right ground of action in that case, any more than in any other. Still farther. Not only the effects are good, but the agent sees beforehand that they will be so. This may make the action indeed a perfectly right action: but it does not make antipathy a right ground of action. For the same sentiment of antipathy, if implicitly deferred to, may be, and very frequently is, productive of the very worst effects. Antipathy, therefore, can never be a right ground of action. No more, therefore, can resentment, which, as will be seen more particularly hereafter, is but a modification of antipathy. The only right ground of action, that can possibly subsist, is, after all, the consideration of utility which, if it is a right principle of action, and of approbation, in any one case, is so in every other. Other principles in abundance, that is, other motives, may be the reasons why such and such an act has been done: that is, the reasons or causes of its being done: but it is this alone that can be the reason why it might or ought to have been done. Antipathy or resentment requires always to be regulated, to prevent its doing mischief: to be regulated by what? always by the principle of utility. The principle of utility neither requires nor admits of any another regulator than itself.

Chapter III: OF THE FOUR SANCTIONS OR SOURCES OF PAIN AND PLEASURE
 It has been shown that the happiness of the individuals, of whom a community is composed, that is their pleasures and their security, is the end and the sole end which the legislator ought to have in view: the sole standard, in conformity to which each individual ought, as far as depends upon the legislator, to be made to fashion his behaviour. But whether it be this or any thing else that is to be done, there is nothing by which a man can ultimately be made to do it, but either pain or pleasure. Having taken a general view of these two grand objects (viz. pleasure, and what comes to the same thing, immunity from pain) in the character of final causes; it will be necessary to take a view of pleasure and pain itself, in the character of efficient causes or means.

 There are four distinguishable sources from which pleasure and pain are in use to flow: considered separately they may be termed the physical, the political, the moral and the religious: and inasmuch as the pleasures and pains belonging to each of them are capable of giving a binding force to any law or rule of conduct, they may all of them termed sanctions.
16

 If it be in the present life, and from the ordinary course of nature, not purposely modified by the interposition of the will of any human being, nor by any extraordinary interposition of any superior invisible being, that the pleasure or the pain takes place or is expected, it may be said to issue from or to belong to the physical sanction.

 If at the hands of a particular person or set of persons in the community, who under names correspondent to that of judge, are chosen for the particular purpose of dispensing it, according to the will of the sovereign or supreme ruling power in the state, it may be said to issue from the political sanction.

 If at the hands of such chance persons in the community, as the party in question may happen in the course of his life to have concerns with, according to each man's spontaneous disposition, and not according to any settled or concerted rule, it may be said to issue from the moral or popular sanction.
17

 If from the immediate hand of a superior invisible being, either in the present life, or in a future, it may be said to issue from the religious sanction.

 Pleasures or pains which may be expected to issue from the physical, political, or moral sanctions, must all of them be expected to be experienced, if ever, in the present life: those which may be expected to issue from the religious sanction, may be expected to be experienced either in the present life or in a future.

 Those which can be experienced in the present life, can of course be no others than such as human nature in the course of the present life is susceptible of: and from each of these sources may flow all the pleasures or pains of which, in the course of the present life, human nature is susceptible. With regard to these then (with which alone we have in this place any concern) those of them which belong to any one of those sanctions, differ not ultimately in kind from those which belong to any one of the other three: the only difference there is among them lies in the circumstances that accompany their production. A suffering which befalls a man in the natural and spontaneous course of things, shall be styled, for instance, a calamity; in which case, if it be supposed to befall him through any imprudence of his, it may be styled a punishment issuing from the physical sanction. Now this same suffering, if inflicted by the law, will be what is commonly called a punishment; if incurred for want of any friendly assistance, which the misconduct, or supposed misconduct, of the sufferer has occasioned to be withholden, a punishment issuing from the moral sanction; if through the immediate interposition of a particular providence, a punishment issuing from the religious sanction.

 A man's goods, or his person, are consumed by fire. If this happened to him by what is called an accident, it was a calamity: if by reason of his own imprudence (for instance, from his neglecting to put his candle out) it may be styled a punishment of the physical sanction: if it happened to him by the sentence of the political magistrate, a punishment belonging to the political sanction; that is, what is commonly called a punishment: if for want of any assistance which his neighbour withheld from him out of some dislike to his moral character, a punishment of the moral sanction: if by an immediate act of God's displeasure, manifested on account of some sin committed by him, or through any distraction of mind, occasioned by the dread of such displeasure, a punishment of the religious sanction.
18

 As to such of the pleasures and pains belonging to the religious sanction, as regard a future life, of what kind these may be we cannot know. These lie not open to our observation. During the present life they are matter only of expectation: and, whether that expectation be derived from natural or revealed religion, the particular kind of pleasure or pain, if it be different from all those which lie open to our observation, is what we can have no idea of. The best ideas we can obtain of such pains and pleasures are altogether unliquidated in point of quality. In what other respects our ideas of them may be liquidated will be considered in another place.
19

 Of these four sanctions the physical is altogether, we may observe, the ground-work of the political and the moral: so is it also of the religious, in as far as the latter bears relation to the present life. It is included in each of those other three. This may operate in any case, (that is, any of the pains or pleasures belonging to it may operate) independently of them: none of them can operate but by means of this. In a word, the powers of nature may operate of themselves; but neither the magistrate, nor men at large, can operate, nor is God in the case in question supposed to operate, but through the powers of nature.

 For these four objects, which in their nature have so much in common, it seemed of use to find a common name. It seemed of use, in the first place, for the convenience of giving a name to certain pleasures and pains, for which a name equally characteristic could hardly otherwise have been found: in the second place, for the sake of holding up the efficacy of certain moral forces, the influence of which is apt not to be sufficiently attended to. Does the political sanction exert an influence over the conduct of mankind? The moral, the religious sanctions do so too. In every inch of his career are the operations of the political magistrate liable to be aided or impeded by these two foreign powers: who, one or other of them, or both, are sure to be either his rivals or his allies. Does it happen to him to leave them out in his calculations? he will be sure almost to find himself mistaken in the result. Of all this we shall find abundant proofs in the sequel of this work. It behoves him, therefore, to have them continually before his eyes; and that under such a name as exhibits the relation they bear to his own purposes and designs.

Chapter IV: VALUE OF A LOT OF PLEASURE OR PAIN, HOW TO BE MEASURED
 Pleasures then, and the avoidance of pains, are the ends that the legislator has in view; it behoves him therefore to understand their value. Pleasures and pains are the instruments he has to work with: it behoves him therefore to understand their force, which is again, in other words, their value.

 To a person considered by himself, the value of a pleasure or pain considered by itself, will be greater or less, according to the four following circumstances:
20

1. Its intensity.
2. Its duration.
3. Its certainty or uncertainty.
4. Its propinquity or remoteness.
 These are the circumstances which are to be considered in estimating a pleasure or a pain considered each of them by itself. But when the value of any pleasure or pain is considered for the purpose of estimating the tendency of any act by which it is produced, there are two other circumstances to be taken into the account; these are,

5. Its fecundity, or the chance it has of being followed by sensations of the same kind: that is, pleasures, if it be a pleasure: pains, if it be a pain.
6. Its purity, or the chance it has of not being followed by sensations of the opposite kind: that is, pains, if it be a pleasure: pleasures, if it be a pain.
These two last, however, are in strictness scarcely to be deemed properties of the pleasure or the pain itself; they are not, therefore, in strictness to be taken into the account of the value of that pleasure or that pain. They are in strictness to be deemed properties only of the act, or other event, by which such pleasure or pain has been produced; and accordingly are only to be taken into the account of the tendency of such act or such event.

 To a number of persons, with reference to each of whom to the value of a pleasure or a pain is considered, it will be greater or less, according to seven circumstances: to wit, the six preceding ones; viz.

1. Its intensity.
2. Its duration.
3. Its certainty or uncertainty.
4. Its propinquity or remoteness.
5. Its fecundity.
6. Its purity.
And one other; to wit:

7. Its extent; that is, the number of persons to whom it extends; or (in other words) who are affected by it.
 To take an exact account then of the general tendency of any act, by which the interests of a community are affected, proceed as follows. Begin with any one person of those whose interests seem most immediately to be affected by it: and take an account,

1. Of the value of each distinguishable pleasure which appears to be produced by it in the first instance.

2. Of the value of each pain which appears to be produced by it in the first instance.

3. Of the value of each pleasure which appears to be produced by it after the first. This constitutes the fecundity of the first pleasure and the impurity of the first pain.

4. Of the value of each pain which appears to be produced by it after the first. This constitutes the fecundity of the first pain, and the impurity of the first pleasure.

5. Sum up all the values of all the pleasures on the one side, and those of all the pains on the other. The balance, if it be on the side of pleasure, will give the good tendency of the act upon the whole, with respect to the interests of that individual person; if on the side of pain, the bad tendency of it upon the whole.

6. Take an account of the number of persons whose interests appear to be concerned; and repeat the above process with respect to each. Sum up the numbers expressive of the degrees of good tendency, which the act has, with respect to each individual, in regard to whom the tendency of it is good upon the whole: do this again with respect to each individual, in regard to whom the tendency of it is good upon the whole: do this again with respect to each individual, in regard to whom the tendency of it is bad upon the whole. Take the balance which if on the side of pleasure, will give the general good tendency of the act, with respect to the total number or community of individuals concerned; if on the side of pain,the general evil tendency, with respect to the same community.

 It is not to be expected that this process should be strictly pursued previously to every moral judgment, or to every legislative or judicial operation. It may, however, be always kept in view: and as near as the process actually pursued on these occasions approaches to it, so near will such process approach to the character of an exact one.

 The same process is alike applicable to pleasure and pain, in whatever shape they appear: and by whatever denomination they are distinguished: to pleasure, whether it be called good (which is properly the cause or instrument of pleasure) or profit (which is distant pleasure, or the cause or instrument of distant pleasure,) or convenience, or advantage, benefit, emolument, happiness, and so forth: to pain, whether it be called evil, (which corresponds to good) or mischief, or inconvenience, or disadvantage, or loss, or unhappiness, and so forth.

 Nor is this a novel and unwarranted, any more than it is a useless theory. In all this there is nothing but what the practice of mankind, wheresoever they have a clear view of their own interest, is perfectly conformable to. An article of property, an estate in land, for instance, is valuable, on what account? On account of the pleasures of all kinds which it enables a man to produce, and what comes to the same thing the pains of all kinds which it enables him to avert. But the value of such an article of property is universally understood to rise or fall according to the length or shortness of the time which a man has in it: the certainty or uncertainty of its coming into possession: and the nearness or remoteness of the time at which, if at all, it is to come into possession. As to the intensity of the pleasures which a man may derive from it, this is never thought of, because it depends upon the use which each particular person may come to make of it; which cannot be estimated till the particular pleasures he may come to derive from it, or the particular pains he may come to exclude by means of it, are brought to view. For the same reason, neither does he think of the fecundity or purity of those pleasures.

Thus much for pleasure and pain, happiness and unhappiness, in general. We come now to consider the several particular kinds of pain and pleasure.

Chapter V: PLEASURES AND PAINS, THEIR KINDS
 Having represented what belongs to all sorts of pleasures and pains alike, we come now to exhibit, each by itself, the several sorts of pains and pleasures. Pains and pleasures may be called by one general word, interesting perceptions. Interesting perceptions are either simple or complex. The simple ones are those which cannot any one of them be resolved into more: complex are those which are resolvable into divers simple ones. A complex interesting perception may accordingly be composed either, 1. Of pleasures alone: 2. Of pains alone: or, 3. Of a pleasure or pleasures, and a pain or pains together. What determines a lot of pleasure, for example, to be regarded as one complex pleasure, rather than as divers simple ones, is the nature of the exciting cause. Whatever pleasures are excited all at once by the action of the same cause, are apt to be looked upon as constituting all together but one pleasure.

 The several simple pleasures of which human nature is susceptible, seem to be as follows: 1. The pleasures of sense. 2. The pleasures of wealth. 3. The pleasures of skill. 4. The pleasures of amity. 5. The pleasures of a good name. 6. The pleasures of power. 7. The pleasures of piety. 8. The pleasures of benevolence. 9. The pleasures of malevolence. 10. The pleasures of memory. 11. The pleasures of imagination. 12. The pleasures of expectation. 13. The pleasures dependent on association. 14. The pleasures of relief.

 The several simple pains seem to be as follows: 1. The pains of privation. 2. The pains of the senses. 3. The pains of awkwardness. 4. The pains of enmity. 5. The pains of an ill name. 6. The pains of piety. 7. The pains of benevolence. 8. The pains of malevolence. 9. The pains of the memory. 10. The pains of the imagination. 11. The pains of expectation. 12. The pains dependent on association.
21

 1. The pleasures of sense seem to be as follows: 1. The pleasures of the taste or palate; including whatever pleasures are experienced in satisfying the appetites of hunger and thirst. 2. The pleasure of intoxication. 3. The pleasures of the organ of smelling. 4. The pleasures of the touch. 5. The simple pleasures of the ear; independent of association. 6. The simple pleasures of the eye; independent of association. 7. The pleasure of the sexual sense. 8. The pleasure of health: or, the internal pleasureable feeling or flow of spirits (as it is called), which accompanies a state of full health and vigour; especially at times of moderate bodily exertion. 9. The pleasures of novelty: or, the pleasures derived from the gratification of the appetite of curiosity, by the application of new objects to any of the senses.
22

 2. By the pleasures of wealth may be meant those pleasures which a man is apt to derive from the consciousness of possessing any article or articles which stand in the list of instruments of enjoyment or security, and more particularly at the time of his first acquiring them; at which time the pleasure may be styled a pleasure of gain or a pleasure of acquisition: at other times a pleasure of possession.

3. The pleasures of skill, as exercised upon particular objects, are those which accompany the application of such particular instruments of enjoyment to their uses, as cannot be so applied without a greater or less share of difficulty or exertion.
23

 4. The pleasures of amity, or self-recommendation, are the pleasures that may accompany the persuasion of a man's being in the acquisition or the possession of the good-will of such or such assignable person or persons in particular: or, as the phrase is, of being upon good terms with him or them: and as a fruit of it, of his being in a way to have the benefit of their spontaneous and gratuitous services.

 5. The pleasures of a good name are the pleasures that accompany the persuasion of a man's being in the acquisition or the possession of the good-will of the world about him; that is, of such members of society as he is likely to have concerns with; and as a means of it, either their love or their esteem, or both: and as a fruit of it, of his being in the way to have the benefit of their spontaneous and gratuitous services. These may likewise be called the pleasures of good repute, the pleasures of honour, or the pleasures of the moral sanction.
24

 6. The pleasures of power are the pleasures that accompany the persuasion of a man's being in a condition to dispose people, by means of their hopes and fears, to give him the benefit of their services: that is, by the hope of some service, or by the fear of some disservice, that he may be in the way to render them.

 7. The pleasures of piety are the pleasures that accompany the belief of a man's being in the acquisition or in possession of the good-will or favour of the Supreme Being: and as a fruit of it, of his being in a way of enjoying pleasures to be received by God's special appointment, either in this life, or in a life to come. These may also be called the pleasures of religion, the pleasures of a religious disposition, or the pleasures of the religious sanction.
25

 8. The pleasures of benevolence are the pleasures resulting from the view of any pleasures supposed to be possessed by the beings who may be the objects of benevolence; to wit, the sensitive beings we are acquainted with; under which are commonly included, 1. The Supreme Being. 2. Human beings. 3. Other animals. These may also be called the pleasures of good-will, the pleasures of sympathy, or the pleasures of the benevolent or social affections.

 9. The pleasures of malevolence are the pleasures resulting from the view of any pain supposed to be suffered by the beings who may become the objects of malevolence: to wit, 1. Human beings. 2. Other animals. These may also be styled the pleasures of ill-will, the pleasures of the irascible appetite, the pleasures of antipathy, or the pleasures of the malevolent or dissocial affections.

 10. The pleasures of the memory are the pleasures which, after having enjoyed such and such pleasures, or even in some case after having suffered such and such pains, a man will now and then experience, at recollecting them exactly in the order and in the circumstances in which they were actually enjoyed or suffered. These derivative pleasures may of course be distinguished into as many species as there are of original perceptions, from whence they may be copied. They may also be styled pleasures of simple recollection.

 11. The pleasures of the imagination are the pleasures which may be derived from the contemplation of any such pleasures as may happen to be suggested by the memory, but in a different order, and accompanied by different groups of circumstances. These may accordingly be referred to any one of the three cardinal points of time, present, past, or future. It is evident they may admit of as many distinctions as those of the former class.

 12. The pleasures of expectation are the pleasures that result from the contemplation of any sort of pleasure, referred to time future, and accompanied with the sentiment of belief. These also may admit of the same distinctions.
26

 13. The pleasures of association are the pleasures which certain objects or incidents may happen to afford, not of themselves, but merely in virtue of some association they have contracted in the mind with certain objects or incidents which are in themselves pleasurable. Such is the case, for instance, with the pleasure of skill, when afforded by such a set of incidents as compose a game of chess. This derives its pleasurable quality from its association partly with the pleasures of skill, as exercised in the production of incidents pleasurable of themselves: partly from its association with the pleasures of power. Such is the case also with the pleasure of good luck, when afforded by such incidents as compose the game of hazard, or any other game of chance, when played at for nothing. This derives its pleasurable quality from its association with one of the pleasures of wealth; to wit, with the pleasure of acquiring it.

 14. Farther on we shall see pains grounded upon pleasures; in like manner may we now see pleasures grounded upon pains. To the catalogue of pleasures may accordingly be added the pleasures of relief: or, the pleasures which a man experiences when, after he has been enduring a pain of any kind for a certain time, it comes to cease, or to abate. These may of course be distinguished into as many species as there are of pains: and may give rise to so many pleasures of memory, of imagination, and of expectation.

 1. Pains of privation are the pains that may result from the thought of not possessing in the time present any of the several kinds of pleasures. Pains of privation may accordingly be resolved into as many kinds as there are of pleasures to which they may correspond, and from the absence whereof they may be derived.

 There are three sorts of pains which are only so many modifications of the several pains of privation. When the enjoyment of any particular pleasure happens to be particularly desired, but without any expectation approaching to assurance, the pain of privation which thereupon results takes a particular name, and is called the pain of desire, or of unsatisfied desire.

 Where the enjoyment happens to have been looked for with a degree of expectation approaching to assurance, and that expectation is made suddenly to cease, it is called a pain of disappointment.

 A pain of privation takes the name of a pain of regret in two cases: 1. Where it is grounded on the memory of a pleasure, which having been once enjoyed, appears not likely to be enjoyed again: 2. Where it is grounded on the idea of a pleasure, which was never actually enjoyed, nor perhaps so much as expected,but which might have been enjoyed (it is supposed,) had such or such a contingency happened, which, in fact, did not happen.

 2. The several pains of the senses seem to be as follows: 1. The pains of hunger and thirst: or the disagreeable sensations produced by the want of suitable substances which need at times to be applied to the alimentary canal. 2. The pains of the taste: or the disagreeable sensations produced by the application of various substances to the palate, and other superior parts of the same canal. 3. The pains of the organ of smell: or the disagreeable sensations produced by the effluvia of various substances when applied to that organ. 4. The pains of the touch: or the disagreeable sensations produced by the application of various substances to the skin. 5. The simple pains of the hearing: or the disagreeable sensations excited in the organ of that sense by various kinds of sounds: independently (as before,) of association. 6. The simple pains of the sight: or the disagreeable sensations if any such there be, that may be excited in the organ of that sense by visible images, independent of the principle of association. 7.
27
 The pains resulting from excessive heat or cold, unless these be referable to the touch. 8. The pains of disease: or the acute and uneasy sensations resulting from the several diseases and indispositions to which human nature is liable. 9. The pain of exertion, whether bodily or mental: or the uneasy sensation which is apt to accompany any intense effort, whether of mind or body.

 3.
28
 The pains of awkwardness are the pains which sometimes result from the unsuccessful endeavour to apply any particular instruments of enjoyment or security to their uses, or from the difficulty a man experiences in applying them.
29

 4. The pains of enmity are the pains that may accompany the persuasion of a man's being obnoxious to the ill-will of such or such an assignable person or persons in particular: or, as the phrase is, of being upon ill terms with him or them: and, in consequence, of being obnoxious to certain pains of some sort or other, of which he may be the cause.

 5. The pains of an ill-name, are the pains that accompany the persuasion of a man's being obnoxious, or in a way to be obnoxious to the ill-will of the world about him. These may likewise be called the pains of ill-repute, the pains of dishonour, or the pains of the moral sanction.
30

 6.
31
 The pains of piety are the pains that accompany the belief of a man's being obnoxious to the displeasure of the Supreme Being: and in consequence to certain pains to be inflicted by his especial appointment, either in this life or in a life to come. These may also be called the pains of religion; the pains of a religious disposition; or the pains of the religious sanction. When the belief is looked upon as well-grounded, these pains are commonly called religious terrors; when looked upon as ill-grounded, superstitious terrors.
32

 7. The pains of benevolence are the pains resulting from the view of any pains supposed to be endured by other beings. These may also be called the pains of good-will, of sympathy, or the pains of the benevolent or social affections.

 8. The pains of malevolence are the pains resulting from the view of any pleasures supposed to be enjoyed by any beings who happen to be the objects of a man's displeasure. These may also be styled the pains of ill-will, of antipathy, or the pains of the malevolent or dissocial affections.

 9. The pains of the memory may be grounded on every one of the above kinds, as well of pains of privation as of positive pains. These correspond exactly to the pleasures of the memory.

 10. The pains of the imagination may also be grounded on any one of the above kinds, as well of pains of privation as of positive pains: in other respects they correspond exactly to the pleasures of the imagination.

 11. The pains of expectation may be grounded on each one of the above kinds, as well of pains of privation as of positive pains. These may be also termed pains of apprehension.
33

 12. The pains of association correspond exactly to the pleasures of association.

 Of the above list there are certain pleasures and pains which suppose the existence of some pleasure or pain, of some other person, to which the pleasure or pain of the person in question has regard: such pleasures and pains may be termed extra-regarding. Others do not suppose any such thing: these may be termed self-regarding.
34
 The only pleasures and pains of the extra-regarding class are those of benevolence and those of malevolence: all the rest
35
 are self-regarding.

 Of all these several sorts of pleasures and pains, there is scarce any one which is not liable, on more accounts than one, to come under the consideration of the law. Is an offense committed? It is the tendency which it has to destroy, in such or such persons, some of these pleasures, or to produce some of these pains, that constitutes the mischief of it, and the ground for punishing it. It is the prospect of some of these pleasures, or of security from some of these pains, that constitutes the motive or temptation, it is the attainment of them that constitutes the profit of the offense. Is the offender to be punished? It can be only by the production of one or more of these pains, that the punishment can be inflicted.
36

Chapter VI: OF CIRCUMSTANCES INFLUENCING SENSIBILITY
 Pain and pleasure are produced in men's minds by the action of certain causes. But the quantity of pleasure and pain runs not uniformly in proportion to the cause; in other words, to the quantity of force exerted by such cause. The truth of this observation rests not upon any metaphysical nicety in the import given to the terms cause, quantity, and force: it will be equally true in whatsoever manner such force be measured.

 The disposition which any one has to feel such or such a quantity of pleasure or pain, upon the application of a cause of given force, is what we term the degree or quantum of his sensibility. This may be either general referring to the sum of the causes that act upon him during a given period: or particular, referring to the action of any one particular cause, or sort of cause.

 But in the same mind such and such causes of pain or pleasure will produce more pain or pleasure than such or such other causes of pain or pleasure: and this proportion will in different minds be different. The disposition which any one has to have the proportion in which he is affected by two such causes, different from that in which another man is affected by the same two causes, may be termed the quality or bias of his sensibility. One man, for instance, may be most affected by the pleasures of the taste; another by those of the ear. So also, if there be a difference in the nature or proportion of two pains or pleasures which they respectively experience from the same cause; a case not so frequent as the former. From the same injury, for instance, one man may feel the same quantity of grief and resentment together as another man: but one of them shall feel a greater share of grief than of resentment: the other, a greater share of resentment than of grief.

 Any incident which serves as a cause, either of pleasure or of pain, may be termed an exciting cause: if of pleasure, a pleasurable cause: if of pain, a painful, afflictive, or dolorific cause.
37

 Now the quantity of pleasure, or of pain, which a man is liable to experience upon the application of an exciting cause, since they will not depend altogether upon that cause, will depend in some measure upon some other circumstance or circumstances: these circumstances, whatsoever they be, maybe termed circumstances influencing sensibility.
38

 These circumstances will apply differently to different exciting causes; insomuch that to a certain exciting cause, a certain circumstance shall not apply at all, which shall apply with great force to another exciting cause. But without entering for the present into these distinctions, it may be of use to sum up all the circumstances which can be found to influence the effect of any exciting cause. These, as on a former occasion, it may be as well first to sum up together in the concisest manner possible, and afterwards to allot a few words to the separate explanation of each article. They seem to be as follows: 1. Health. 2. Strength. 3. Hardiness. 4. Bodily imperfection. 5. Quantity and quality of knowledge. 6. Strength of intellectual powers. 7. Firmness of mind. 8. Steadiness of mind. 9. Bent of inclination. 10. Moral sensibility. 11. Moral biases. 12. Religious sensibility. 13. Religious biases. 14. Sympathetic sensibility. 15. Sympathetic biases. 16. Antipathetic sensibility. 17. Antipathetic biases. 18. Insanity. 19. Habitual occupations. 20. Pecuniary circumstances. 21. Connexions in the way of sympathy. 22. Connexions in the way of antipathy. 23. Radical frame of body. 24. Radical frame of mind. 25. Sex. 26. Age. 27. Rank. 28. Education. 29. Climate. 30. Lineage. 31. Government. 32. Religious profession.
39

 1. Health is the absence of disease, and consequently of all those kinds of pain which are among the symptoms of disease. A man may be said to be in a state of health when he is not conscious of any uneasy sensations, the primary seat of which can be perceived to be anywhere in his body.
40
 In point of of general sensibility, a man who is under the pressure of any bodily indisposition, or, as the phrase is, is in an ill state of health, is less sensible to the influence of any pleasurable cause, and more so to that of any afflictive one, than if he were well.

 2. The circumstance of strength, though in point of causality closely connected with that of health, is perfectly distinguishable from it. The same man will indeed generally be stronger in a good state of health than in a bad one. But one man, even in a bad state of health, may be stronger than another even in a good one. Weakness is a common concomitant of disease: but in consequence of his radical frame of body, a man may be weak all his life long, without experiencing any disease. Health, as we have observed, is principally a negative circumstance: strength a positive one. The degree of a man's strength can be measured with tolerable accuracy.
41

 3. Hardiness is a circumstance which, though closely connected with that of strength, is distinguishable from it. Hardiness is the absence of irritability. Irritability respects either pain, resulting from the action of mechanical causes; or disease, resulting from the action of causes purely physiological. Irritability, in the former sense, is the disposition to undergo a greater or less degree of pain upon the application of a mechanical cause; such as are most of those applications by which simple afflictive punishments are inflicted, as whipping, beating, and the like. In the latter sense, it is the disposition to contract disease with greater or less facility, upon the application of any instrument acting on the body by its physiological properties; as in the case of fevers, or of colds, or other inflammatory diseases, produced by the application of damp air: or to experience immediate uneasiness, as in the case of relaxation or chilliness produced by an over or under proportion of the matter of heat.

Hardiness, even in the sense in which it is opposed to the action of mechanical causes, is distinguishable from strength. The external indications of strength are the abundance and firmness of the muscular fibres: those of hardiness, in this sense, are the firmness of the muscular fibres, and the callosity of the skin. Strength is more peculiarly the gift of nature: hardiness, of education. Of two persons who have had, the one the education of a gentleman, the other, that of a common sailor, the first may be the stronger, at the same time that the other is the hardier.

 4. By bodily imperfection may be understood that condition which a person is in, who either stands distinguished by any remarkable deformity, or wants any of those parts or faculties, which the ordinary run of persons of the same sex and age are furnished with: who, for instance, has a hare-lip, is deaf, or has lost a hand. This circumstance, like that of ill-health, tends in general to diminish more or less the effect of any pleasurable circumstance, and to increase that of any afflictive one. The effect of this circumstance, however, admits of great variety: inasmuch as there are a great variety of ways in which a man may suffer in his personal appearance, and in his bodily organs and faculties: all which differences will be taken notice of in their proper places.
42

 5. So much for circumstances belonging to the condition of the body: we come now to those which concern the condition of the mind: the use of mentioning these will be seen hereafter. In the first place may be reckoned the quantity and quality of the knowledge the person in question happens to possess: that is, of the ideas which he has actually in store, ready upon occasion to call to mind: meaning such ideas as are in some way or other of an interesting nature: that is, of a nature in some way or other to influence his happiness, or that of other men. When these ideas are many, and of importance, a man is said to be a man of knowledge; when few, or not of importance, ignorant.

 6. By strength of intellectual powers may be understood the degree of facility which a man experiences in his endeavours to call to mind as well such ideas as have been already aggregated to his stock of knowledge, as any others, which, upon any occasion that may happen, he may conceive a desire to place there. It seems to be on some such occasion as this that the words parts and talents are commonly employed. To this head may be referred the several qualities of readiness of apprehension, accuracy and tenacity of memory, strength of attention, clearness of discernment, amplitude of comprehension, vividity and rapidity of imagination. Strength of intellectual powers, in general, seems to correspond pretty exactly to general strength of body: as any of these qualities in particular does to particular strength.

 7. Firmness of mind on the one hand, and irritability on the other, regard the proportion between the degrees of efficacy with which a man is acted upon by an exciting cause, of which the value lies chiefly in magnitude, and one of which the value lies chiefly in propinquity.
43
 A man may be said to be of a firm mind, when small pleasures or pains, which are present or near, do not affect him, in a greater proportion to their value, than greater pleasures or pains, which are uncertain or remote;
44
 of an irritable mind, when the contrary is the case.

 8. Steadiness regards the time during which a given exciting cause of a given value continues to affect a man in nearly the same manner and degree as at first, no assignable external event or change of circumstances intervening to make an alteration in its force.
45

 9. By the bent of a man's inclinations may be understood the propensity he has to expect pleasure or pain from certain objects, rather than from others. A man's inclinations may be said to have such or such a bent, when, amongst the several sorts of objects which afford pleasure in some degree to all men, he is apt to expect more pleasure from one particular sort, than from another particular sort, or more from any given particular sort, than another man would expect from that sort; or when, amongst the several sorts of objects, which to one man afford pleasure, whilst to another they afford none, he is apt to expect, or not to expect, pleasure from an object of such or such a sort: so also with regard to pains. This circumstance, though intimately connected with that of the bias of a man's sensibility, is not undistinguishable from it. The quantity of pleasure or pain, which on any given occasion a man may experience from an application of any sort, may be greatly influenced by the expectations he has been used to entertain of pleasure or pain from that quarter; but it will not be absolutely determined by them: for pleasure or pain may come upon him from a quarter from which he was not accustomed to expect it.

 10. The circumstances of moral, religious, sympathetic, and antipathetic sensibility, when closely considered, will appear to be included in some sort under that of bent of inclination. On account of their particular importance they may, however, be worth mentioning apart. A man's moral sensibility may be said to be strong, when the pains and pleasures of the moral sanction
46
 show greater in his eyes, in comparison with other pleasures and pains (and consequently exert a stronger influence) than in the eyes of the persons he is compared with; in other words, when he is acted on with more than ordinary efficacy by the sense of honour: it may be said to be weak, when the contrary is the case.

 11. Moral sensibility seems to regard the average effect or influence of the pains and pleasures of the moral sanction, upon all sorts of occasions to which it is applicable, or happens to be applied. It regards the average force or quantity of the impulses the mind receives from that source during a given period. Moral bias regards the particular acts on which, upon so many particular occasions, the force of that sanction is looked upon as attaching. It regards the quality or direction of those impulses. It admits of as many varieties, therefore, as there are dictates which the moral sanction may be conceived to issue forth. A man may be said to have such or such a moral bias, or to have a moral bias in favour of such or such an action, when he looks upon it as being of the number of those of which the performance is dictated by the moral sanction.

 12. What has been said with regard to moral sensibility, may be applied, mutatis mutandis, to religious.

 13. What has been said with regard to moral biases, may also be applied, mutatis mutandis, to religious biases.

 14. By sympathetic sensibility is to be understood the propensity that a man has to derive pleasure from the happiness, and pain from the unhappiness, of other sensitive beings. It is the stronger, the greater the ratio of the pleasure or pain he feels on their account is to that of the pleasure or pain which (according to what appears to him) they feel for themselves.

 15. Sympathetic bias regards the description of the parties who are the objects of a man's sympathy: and of the acts or other circumstances of or belonging to those persons, by which the sympathy is excited. These parties may be, 1. Certain individuals. 2. Any subordinate class of individuals. 3. The whole nation. 4. Human kind in general. 5. The whole sensitive creation. According as these objects of sympathy are more numerous, the affection, by which the man is biased, may be said to be the more enlarged.

 16, 17. Antipathetic sensibility and antipathetic biases are just the reverse of sympathetic sensibility and sympathetic biases. By antipathetic sensibility is to be understood the propensity that a man has to derive pain from the happiness, and pleasure from the unhappiness, of other sensitive beings.

 18. The circumstance of insanity of mind corresponds to that of bodily imperfection. It admits, however, of much less variety, inasmuch as the soul is (for aught we can perceive) one indivisible thing, not distinguishable, like the body, into parts. What lesser degrees of imperfection the mind may be susceptible of, seem to be comprisable under the already-mentioned heads of ignorance, weakness of mind, irritability, or unsteadiness; or under such others as are reducible to them. Those which are here in view are those extraordinary species and degrees of mental imperfection, which, wherever they take place, are as conspicuous and as unquestionable as lameness or blindness in the body: operating partly, it should seem, by inducing an extraordinary degree of the imperfections above mentioned, partly by giving an extraordinary and preposterous bent to the inclinations.

 19. Under the head of a man's habitual occupations, are to be understood, on this occasion, as well those which he pursues for the sake of profit, as those which he pursues for the sake of present pleasure. The consideration of the profit itself belongs to the head of a man's pecuniary circumstances. It is evident, that if by any means a punishment, or any other exciting cause, has the effect of putting it out of his power to continue in the pursuit of any such occupation, it must on that account be much the more distressing. A man's habitual occupations, though intimately connected in point of causality with the bent of his inclinations, are not to be looked upon as precisely the same circumstance. An amusement, or channel of profit, may be the object of a man's inclinations, which has never been the subject of his habitual occupations: for it may be, that though he wished to betake himself to it, he never did, it not being in his power: a circumstance which may make a good deal of difference in the effect of any incident by which he happens to be debarred from it.

 20. Under the head of pecuniary circumstances, I mean to bring to view the proportion which a man's means bear to his wants: the sum total of his means of every kind, to the sum total of his wants of every kind. A man's means depend upon three circumstances: 1. His property. 2. The profit of his labour. 3. His connexions in the way of support. His wants seem to depend upon four circumstances. 1. His habits of expense. 2. His connexions in the way of burthen. 3. Any present casual demand he may have. 4. The strength of his expectation. By a man's property is to be understood, whatever he has in store independent of his labour. By the profit of his labour is to be understood the growing profit. As to labour, it may be either of the body principally, or of the mind principally, or of both indifferently: nor does it matter in what manner, nor on what subject, it be applied, so it produce a profit. By a man's connexions in the way of support, are to be understood the pecuniary assistances, of whatever kind, which he is in a way of receiving from any persons who, on whatever account, and in whatever proportion, he has reason to expect should contribute gratis to his maintenance: such as his parents, patrons, and relations. It seems manifest, that a man can have no other means than these. What he uses, he must have either of his own, or from other people: if from other people, either gratis or for a price. As to habits of expense, it is well known, that a man's desires are governed in a great degree by his habits. Many are the cases in which desire (and consequently the pain of privation connected with it
47
) would not even subsist at all, but for previous enjoyment. By a man's connexions in the way of burthen, are to be understood whatever expense he has reason to look upon himself as bound to be at in the support of those who by law, or the customs of the world, are warranted in looking up to him for assistance; such as children, poor relations, superannuated servants, and any other dependents whatsoever. As to present casual demand, it is manifest, that there are occasions on which a given sum will be worth infinitely more to a man than the same sum would at another time: where, for example, in a case of extremity, a man stands in need of extraordinary medical assistance: or wants money to carry on a law-suit, on which his all depends: or has got a livelihood waiting for him in a distant country, and wants money for the charges of conveyance. In such cases, any piece of good or ill fortune, in the pecuniary way, might have a very different effect from what it would have at any other time. With regard to strength of expectation; when one man expects to gain or to keep a thing which another does not, it is plain the circumstance of not having it will affect the former very differently from the latter; who, indeed, commonly will not be affected by it at all.

 21. Under the head of a man's connexions in the way of sympathy, I would bring to view the number and description of the persons in whose welfare he takes such a concern, as that the idea of their happiness should be productive of pleasure, and that of their unhappiness of pain to him: for instance, a man's wife, his children, his parents, his near relations, and intimate friends. This class of persons, it is obvious, will for the most part include the two classes by which his pecuniary circumstances are affected: those, to wit, from whose means he may expect support, and those whose wants operate on him as a burthen. But it is obvious, that besides these, it may very well include others, with whom he has no such pecuniary connexion: and even with regard to these, it is evident that the pecuniary dependence, and the union of affections, are circumstances perfectly distinguishable. Accordingly, the connexions here in question, independently of any influence they may have on a man's pecuniary circumstances, have an influence on the effect of any exciting causes whatsoever. The tendency of them is to increase a man's general sensibility; to increase, on the one hand, the pleasure produced by all pleasurable causes; on the other, the pain produced by all afflictive ones. When any pleasurable incident happens to a man, he naturally, in the first moment, thinks of the pleasure it will afford immediately to himself: presently afterwards, however (except in a few cases, which is not worth while here to insist on) he begins to think of the pleasure which his friends will feel upon their coming to know of it: and this secondary pleasure is commonly no mean addition to the primary one. First comes the self-regarding pleasure: then comes the idea of the pleasure of sympathy, which you suppose that pleasure of yours will give birth to in the bosom of your friend: and this idea excites again in yours a new pleasure of sympathy, grounded upon his. The first pleasure issuing from your own bosom, as it were from a radiant point, illuminates the bosom of your friend: reverberated from thence, it is reflected with augmented warmth to the point from whence it first proceeded: and so it is with pains.
48

Nor does this effect depend wholly upon affection. Among near relations, although there should be no kindness, the pleasures and pains of the moral sanction are quickly propagated by a peculiar kind of sympathy: no article, either of honour or disgrace, can well fall upon a man, without extending to a certain distance within the circle of his family. What reflects honour upon the father, reflects honour upon the son: what reflects disgrace, disgrace. The cause of this singular and seemingly unreasonable circumstance (that is, its analogy to the rest of the phenomena of the human mind,) belongs not to the present purpose. It is sufficient if the effect be beyond dispute.

 22. Of a man's connexions in the way of antipathy, there needs not any thing very particular to be observed. Happily there is no primeval and constant source of antipathy in a human nature, as there is of sympathy. There are no permanent sets of persons who are naturally and of course the objects of antipathy to a man, as there are who are the objects of the contrary affection. Sources, however, but too many, of antipathy, are apt to spring up upon various occasions during the course of a man's life: and whenever they do, this circumstance may have a very considerable influence on the effects of various exciting causes. As on the one hand, a punishment, for instance, which tends to separate a man from those with whom he is connected in the way of sympathy, so on the other hand, one which tends to force him into the company of those with whom he is connected in the way of antipathy, will, on that account, be so much the more distressing. It is to be observed, that sympathy itself multiplies the sources of antipathy. Sympathy for your friend gives birth to antipathy on your part against all those who are objects of antipathy, as well as to sympathy for those who are objects of sympathy to him. In the same manner does antipathy multiply the sources of sympathy; though commonly perhaps with rather a less degree of efficacy. Antipathy against your enemy is apt to give birth to sympathy on your part towards those who are objects of antipathy, as well as to antipathy against those who are objects of sympathy, to him.

 23. Thus much for the circumstances by which the effect of any exciting cause may be influenced, when applied upon any given occasion, at any given period. But besides these supervening incidents, there are other circumstances relative to a man, that may have their influence, and which are co-eval to his birth. In the first place, it seems to be universally agreed, that in the original frame or texture of every man's body, there is a something which, independently of all subsequently intervening circumstances, renders him liable to be affected by causes producing bodily pleasure or pain, in a manner different from that in which another man would be affected by the same causes. To the catalogue of circumstances influencing a man's sensibility, we may therefore add his original or radical frame, texture, constitution, or temperament of body.

 24. In the next place, it seems to be pretty well agreed, that there is something also in the original frame or texture of every man's mind, which, independently of all exterior and subsequently intervening circumstances, and even of his radical frame of body, makes him liable to be differently affected by the same exciting causes, from what another man would be. To the catalogue of circumstances influencing a man's sensibility, we may therefore further add his original or radical frame, texture, constitution or temperament of mind.
49

 It seems pretty certain, all this while, that a man's sensibility to causes producing pleasure or pain, even of mind, may depend in a considerable degree upon his original and acquired frame of body. But we have no reason to think that it can depend altogether upon that frame: since, on the one hand, we see persons whose frame of body is as much alike as can be conceived, differing very considerably in respect of their mental frame: and, on the other hand, persons whose frame of mind is as much alike as can be conceived, differing very conspicuously in regard to their bodily frame.
50

 It seems indisputable also, that the different sets of a external occurrences that may befall a man in the course of his life, will make great differences in the subsequent texture of his mind at any given period: yet still those differences are not solely to be attributed to such occurrences. Equally far from the truth seems that opinion to be (if any such be maintained) which attributes all to nature, and that which attributes all to education. The two circumstances will therefore still remain distinct, as well from one another, as from all others.

 Distinct however as they are, it is manifest, that at no period in the active part of a man's life can they either of them make their appearance by themselves. All they do is to constitute the latent ground-work which the other supervening circumstances have to work upon and whatever influence those original principles may have, is so changed and modified, and covered over, as it were, by those other circumstances, as never to be separately discernible. The effects of the one influence are indistinguishably blended with those of the other.

 The emotions of the body are received, and with reason, as probable indications of the temperature of the mind. But they are far enough from conclusive. A man may exhibit, for instance, the exterior appearances of grief, without really grieving at all, or at least in any thing near the proportion in which he appears to grieve. Oliver Cromwell, whose conduct indicated a heart more than ordinarily callous, was as remarkably profuse in tears.
51
 Many men can command the external appearances of sensibility with very little real feeling.
52
 The female sex commonly with greater facility than the male: hence the proverbial expression of a woman's tears. To have this kind of command over one's self, was the characteristic excellence of the orator of ancient times, and is still that of the player in our own.

 The remaining circumstances may, with reference to those already mentioned, be termed secondary influencing circumstances. These have an influence, it is true, on the quantum or bias of a man's sensibility, but it is only by means of the other primary ones. The manner in which these two sets of circumstances are concerned, is such that the primary ones do the business, while the secondary ones lie most open to observation. The secondary ones, therefore, are those which are most heard of; on which account it will be necessary to take notice of them: at the same time that it is only by means of the primary ones that their influence can be explained; whereas the influence of the primary ones will be apparent enough, without any mention of the secondary ones.

 25. Among such of the primitive modifications of the corporeal frame as may appear to influence the quantum and bias of sensibility, the most obvious and conspicuous are those which constitute the sex. In point of quantity, the sensibility of the female sex appears in general to be greater than that of the male. The health of the female is more delicate than that of the male: in point of strength and hardiness of body, in point of quantity and quality of knowledge, in point of strength of intellectual powers, and firmness of mind, she is commonly inferior: moral, religious, sympathetic, and antipathetic sensibility are commonly stronger in her than in the male. The quality of her knowledge, and the bent of her inclinations, are commonly in many respects different. Her moral biases are also, in certain respects, remarkably different: chastity, modesty, and delicacy, for instance, are prized more than courage in a woman: courage, more than any of those qualities, in a man. The religious biases in the two sexes are not apt to be remarkably different; except that the female is rather more inclined than the male to superstition; that is, to observances not dictated by the principle of utility; a difference that may be pretty well accounted for by some of the before-mentioned circumstances. Her sympathetic biases are in many respects different; for her own offspring all their lives long, and for children in general while young, her affection is commonly stronger than that of the male. Her affections are apt to be less enlarged: seldom expanding themselves so much as to take in the welfare of her country in general, much less that of mankind, or the whole sensitive creation: seldom embracing any extensive class or division, even of her own countrymen, unless it be in virtue of her sympathy for some particular individuals that belong to it. In general, her antipathetic, as well as sympathetic biases are apt to be less conformable to the principle of utility than those of the male; owing chiefly to some deficiency in point of knowledge, discernment, and comprehension. Her habitual occupations of the amusing kind are apt to be in many respects different from those of the male. With regard to her connexions in the way of sympathy, there can be no difference. In point of pecuniary circumstances, according to the customs of perhaps all countries, she is in general less independent.

 26. Age is of course divided into divers periods, of which the number and limits are by no means uniformly ascertained. One might distinguish it, for the present purpose, into, 1. Infancy. 2. Adolescence. 3. Youth. 4. Maturity. 5. Decline. 6. Decrepitude. It were lost time to stop on the present occasion to examine it at each period, and to observe the indications it gives, with respect to the several primary circumstances just reviewed. Infancy and decrepitude are commonly inferior to the other periods, in point of health, strength, hardiness, and so forth. In infancy, on the part of the female, the imperfections of that sex are enhanced: on the part of the male, imperfections take place mostly similar in quality, but greater in quantity, to those attending the states of adolescence, youth, and maturity in the female. In the stage of decrepitude both sexes relapse into many of the imperfections of infancy. The generality of these observations may easily be corrected upon a particular review.

 27. Station, or rank in life, is a circumstance, that, among a civilized people, will commonly undergo a multiplicity of variations. Cæteris paribus, the quantum of sensibility appears to be greater in the higher ranks of men than in the lower. The primary circumstances in respect of which this secondary circumstance is apt to induce or indicate a difference, seem principally to be as follows: 1. Quantity and Quality of knowledge. 2. Strength of mind. 3. Bent of inclination. 4. Moral sensibility. 5. Moral biases. 6. Religious sensibility. 7. Religious biases. 8. Sympathetic sensibility. 9. Sympathetic biases. 10. Antipathetic sensibility. 11. Antipathetic biases. 12. Habitual occupations. 13. Nature and productiveness of a man's means of livelihood. 14. Connexions importing profit. 15. Habit of expense. 16. Connexions importing burthen. A man of a certain rank will frequently have a number of dependents besides those whose dependency is the result of natural relationship. As to health, strength, and hardiness, if rank has any influence on these circumstances, it is but in a remote way chiefly by the influence it may have on its habitual occupations.

 28. The influence of education is still more extensive. Education stands upon a footing somewhat different from that of the circumstances of age, sex, and rank. These words, though the influence of the circumstances they respectively denote exerts itself principally, if not entirely, through the medium of certain of the primary circumstances before mentioned, present, however, each of them a circumstance which has a separate existence of itself. This is not the case with the word education: which means nothing any farther than as it serves to call up to view some one or more of those primary circumstances. Education may be distinguished into physical and mental; the education of the body and that of the mind: mental, again, into intellectual and moral; the culture of the understanding, and the culture of the affections. The education a man receives, is given to him partly by others, partly by himself. By education then nothing more can be expressed than the condition a man is in in respect of those primary circumstances, as resulting partly from the management and contrivance of others, principally of those who in the early periods of his life have had dominion over him, partly from his own. To the physical part of his education, belong the circumstances of health, strength, and hardiness: sometimes, by accident, that of bodily imperfection; as where by intemperance or negligence an irreparable mischief happens to his person. To the intellectual part, those of quantity and quality of knowledge, and in some measure perhaps those of firmness of mind and steadiness. To the moral part, the bent of his inclinations, the quantity and quality of his moral, religious, sympathetic, and antipathetic sensibility: to all three branches indiscriminately, but under the superior control of external occurrences, his habitual recreations, his property, his means of livelihood, his connexions in the way of profit and of burthen, and his habits of expense. With respect indeed to all these points, the influence of education is modified, in a manner more or less apparent, by that of exterior occurrences; and in a manner scarcely at all apparent, and altogether out of the reach of calculation, by the original texture and constitution as well of his body as of his mind.

 29. Among the external circumstances by which the influence of education is modified, the principal are those which come under the head of climate. This circumstance places itself in front, and demands a separate denomination, not merely on account of the magnitude of its influence, but also on account of its being conspicuous to every body, and of its applying indiscriminately to great numbers at a time. This circumstance depends for its essence upon the situation of that part of the earth which is in question, with respect to the course taken by the whole planet in its revolution round the sun: but for its influence it depends upon the condition of the bodies which compose the earth's surface at that part, principally upon the quantities of sensible heat at different periods, and upon the density, and purity, and dryness or moisture of the circumambient air. Of the so often mentioned primary circumstances, there are few of which the production is not influenced by this secondary one; partly by its manifest effects upon the body; partly by its less perceptible effects upon the mind. In hot climates men's health is apt to be more precarious than in cold: their strength and hardiness less: their vigour, firmness, and steadiness of mind less: and thence indirectly their quantity of knowledge: the bent of their inclinations different: most remarkably so in respect of their superior propensity to sexual enjoyments, and in respect of the earliness of the period at which that propensity begins to manifest itself: their sensibilities of all kinds more intense: their habitual occupations savouring more of sloth than of activity: their radical frame of body less strong, probably, and less hardy: their radical frame of mind less vigorous, less firm, less steady.

 30. Another article in the catalogue of secondary circumstances, is that of race or lineage: the national race or lineage a man issues from. This circumstance, independently of that of climate, will commonly make some difference in point of radical frame of mind and body. A man of negro race, born in France or England, is a very different being, in many respects, from a man of French or English race. A man of Spanish race, born in Mexico or Peru, is at the hour of his birth a different sort of being, in many respects, from a man of the original Mexican or Peruvian race. This circumstance, as far as it is distinct from climate, rank, and education, and from the two just mentioned, operates chiefly through the medium of moral, religious, sympathetic, and antipathetic biases.

 31. The last circumstance but one, is that of government: the government a man lives under at the time in question; or rather that under which he has been accustomed most to live. This circumstance operates principally through the medium of education: the magistrate operating in the character of a tutor upon all the members of the state, by the direction he gives to their hopes and to their fears. Indeed under a solicitous and attentive government, the ordinary preceptor, nay even the parent himself, is but a deputy, as it were, to the magistrate: whose controlling influence, different in this respect from that of the ordinary preceptor, dwells with a man to his life's end. The effects of the peculiar power of the magistrate are seen more particularly in the influence it exerts over the quantum and bias of men's moral, religious, sympathetic, and antipathetic sensibilities. Under a well-constituted, or even under a well-administered though ill-constituted government, men's moral sensibility is commonly stronger, and their moral biases more conformable to the dictates of utility: their religious sensibility frequently weaker, but their religious biases less unconformable to the dictates of utility: their sympathetic affections more enlarged, directed to the magistrate more than to small parties or to individuals, and more to the whole community than to either: their antipathetic sensibilities less violent, as being more obsequious to the influence of well-directed moral biases, and less apt to be excited by that of ill-directed religious ones: their antipathetic biases more conformable to well-directed moral ones, more apt (in proportion) to be grounded on enlarged and sympathetic than on narrow and self-regarding affections, and accordingly, upon the whole, more conformable to the dictates of utility.

 32. The last circumstance is that of religious profession: the religious profession a man is of: the religious fraternity of which he is a member. This circumstance operates principally through the medium of religious sensibility and religious biases. It operates, however, as an indication more or less conclusive, with respect to several other circumstances. With respect to some, scarcely but through the medium of the two just mentioned: this is the case with regard to the quantum and bias of a man's moral, sympathetic, and antipathetic sensibility: perhaps in some cases with regard to quantity and quality of knowledge, strength of intellectual powers, and bent of inclination. With respect to others, it may operate immediately of itself: this seems to be the case with regard to a man's habitual occupations, pecuniary circumstances, and connexions in the way of sympathy and antipathy. A man who pays very little inward regard to the dictates of the religion which he finds it necessary to profess, may find it difficult to avoid joining in the ceremonies of it, and bearing a part in the pecuniary burthens it imposes.
53
 By the force of habit and example he may even be led to entertain a partiality for persons of the same profession, and a proportionable antipathy against those of a rival one. In particular, the antipathy against persons of different persuasions is one of the last points of religion which men part with. Lastly, it is obvious, that the religious profession a man is of cannot but have a considerable influence on his education. But, considering the import of the term education, to say this is perhaps no more than saying in other words what has been said already.

 These circumstances, all or many of them, will need to be attended to as often as upon any occasion any account is taken of any quantity of pain or pleasure, as resulting from any cause. Has any person sustained an injury? they will need to be considered in estimating the mischief of the offense. Is satisfaction to be made to him? they will need to be attended to in adjusting the quantum of that satisfaction. Is the injurer to be punished? they will need to be attended to in estimating the force of the impression that will be made on him by any given punishment.

 It is to be observed, that though they seem all of them, on some account or other, to merit a place in the catalogue, they are not all of equal use in practice. Different articles among them are applicable to different exciting causes. Of those that may influence the effect of the same exciting cause, some apply indiscriminately to whole classes of persons together; being applicable to all, without any remarkable difference in degree: these may be directly and pretty fully provided for by the legislator. This is the case, for instance, with the primary circumstances of bodily imperfection, and insanity: with the secondary circumstance of sex: perhaps with that of age: at any rate with those of rank, of climate, of lineage, and of religious profession. Others, however they may apply to whole classes of persons, yet in their application to different individuals are susceptible of perhaps an indefinite variety of degrees. These cannot be fully provided for by the legislator; but, as the existence of them, in every sort of case, is capable of being ascertained, and the degree in which they take place is capable of being measured, provision may be made for them by the judge, or other executive magistrate, to whom the several individuals that happen to be concerned may be made known. This is the case, 1. With the circumstance of health. 2. In some sort with that of strength. 3. Scarcely with that of hardiness: still less with those of quantity and quality of knowledge, strength of intellectual powers, firmness or steadiness of mind; except in as far as a man's condition, in respect of those circumstances, may be indicated by the secondary circumstances of sex, age, or rank: hardly with that of bent of inclination, except in as far as that latent circumstance is indicated by the more manifest one of habitual occupations: hardly with that of a man's moral sensibility or biases, except in as far as they may be indicated by his sex, age, rank, and education: not at all with his religious sensibility and religious biases, except in as far as they may be indicated by the religious profession he belongs to: not at all with the quantity or quality of his sympathetic or antipathetic sensibilities, except in as far as they may be presumed from his sex, age, rank, education, lineage, or religious profession. It is the case, however, with his habitual occupations, with his pecuniary circumstances, and with his connexions in the way of sympathy. Of others, again, either the existence cannot be ascertained, or the degree cannot be measured. These, therefore, cannot be taken into account, either by the legislator or the executive magistrate. Accordingly, they would have no claim to be taken notice of, were it not for those secondary circumstances by which they are indicated, and whose influence could not well be understood without them. What these are has been already mentioned.

 It has already been observed, that different articles in this list of circumstances apply to different exciting causes: the circumstance of bodily strength, for instance, has scarcely any influence of itself (whatever it may have in a roundabout way, and by accident) on the effect of an incident which should increase or diminish the quantum of a man's property. It remains to be considered, what the exciting causes are with which the legislator has to do. These may, by some accident or other, be any whatsoever: but those which he has principally to do, are those of the painful or afflictive kind. With pleasurable ones he has little to do, except now and then by accident: the reasons of which may be easily enough perceived, at the same time that it would take up too much room to unfold them here. The exciting causes with which he has principally to do, are, on the one hand, the mischievous acts, which it is his business to prevent; on the other hand, the punishments, by the terror of which it is his endeavour to prevent them. Now of these two sets of exciting causes, the latter only is of his production: being produced partly by his own special appointment, partly in conformity to his general appointment, by the special appointment of the judge. For the legislator, therefore, as well as for the judge, it is necessary (if they would know what it is they are doing when they are appointing punishment) to have an eye to all these circumstances. For the legislator, lest, meaning to apply a certain quantity of punishment to all persons who shall put themselves in a given predicament, he should unawares apply to some of those persons much more or much less than he himself intended; for the judge, lest, in applying to a particular person a particular measure of punishment, he should apply much more or much less than was intended, perhaps by himself, and at any rate by the legislator. They ought each of them, therefore, to have before him, on the one hand, a list of the several circumstances by which sensibility may be influenced; on the other hand, a list of the several species and degrees of punishment which they purpose to make use of: and then, by making a comparison between the two, to form a detailed estimate of the influence of each of the circumstances in question, upon the effect of each species and degree of punishment.

There are two plans or orders of distribution, either of which might be pursued in the drawing up this estimate. The one is to make the name of the circumstance take the lead, and under it to represent the different influences it exerts over the effects of the several modes of punishment: the other is to make the name of the punishment take the lead, and under it to represent the different influences which are exerted over the effects of it by the several circumstances above mentioned. Now of these two sorts of objects, the punishment is that to which the intention of the legislator is directed in the first instance. This is of his own creation, and will be whatsoever he thinks fit to make it: the influencing circumstance exists independently of him, and is what it is whether he will or no. What he has occasion to do is to establish a certain species and degree of punishment: and it is only with reference to that punishment that he has occasion to make any inquiry concerning any of the circumstances here in question. The latter of the two plans therefore is that which appears by far the most useful and commodious. But neither upon the one nor the other plan can any such estimate be delivered here.
54

 Of the several circumstances contained in this catalogue, it may be of use to give some sort of analytic view; in order that it may be the more easily discovered if any which ought to have been inserted are omitted; and that, with regard to those which are inserted, it may be seen how they differ and agree.

In the first place, they may be distinguished into primary and secondary: those may be termed primary, which operate immediately of themselves: those secondary, which operate not but by the medium of the former. To this latter head belong the circumstances of sex, age, station in life, education, climate, lineage, government, and religious profession: the rest are primary. These again are either connate or adventitious: those which are connate, are radical frame of body and radical frame of mind. Those which are adventitious, are either personal, or exterior. The personal, again, concern either a man's dispositions, or his actions. Those which concern his dispositions, concern either his body or his mind. Those which concern his body are health, strength, hardiness, and bodily imperfection. Those which concern his mind, again, concern either his understanding or his affections. To the former head belong the circumstances of quantity and quality of knowledge, strength of understanding, and insanity. To the latter belong the circumstances of firmness of mind, steadiness, bent of inclination, moral sensibility, moral biases, religious sensibility, religious biases, sympathetic sensibility, sympathetic biases, antipathetic sensibility, and antipathetic biases. Those which regard his actions, are his habitual occupations. Those which are exterior to him, regard either the things or the persons which he is concerned with; under the former head come his pecuniary circumstances;
55
 under the latter, his connexions in the way of sympathy and antipathy.

Chapter VII: OF HUMAN ACTIONS IN GENERAL
 The business of government is to promote the happiness of the society, by punishing and rewarding. That part of its business which consists in punishing, is more particularly the subject of penal law. In proportion as an act tends to disturb that happiness, in proportion as the tendency of it is pernicious, will be the demand it creates for punishment. What happiness consists of we have already seen: enjoyment of pleasures, security from pains.

 The general tendency of an act is more or less pernicious, according to the sum total of its consequences: that is, according to the difference between the sum of such as are good, and the sum of such as are evil.

 It is to be observed, that here, as well as henceforward, wherever consequences are spoken of, such only are meant as are material. Of the consequences of any act, the multitude and variety must needs be infinite: but such of them only as are material are worth regarding. Now among the consequences of an act, be they what they may, such only, by one who views them in the capacity of a legislator, can be said to be material,
56
 as either consist of pain or pleasure, or have an influence in the production of pain or pleasure.
57

 It is also to be observed, that into the account of the consequences of the act, are to be taken not such only as might have ensued, were intention out of the question, but such also as depend upon the connexion there may be between these first-mentioned consequences and the intention. The connexion there is between the intention and certain consequences is, as we shall see hereafter,
58
 a means of producing other consequences. In this lies the difference between rational agency and irrational.

 Now the intention, with regard to the consequences of an act, will depend upon two things: 1. The state of the will or intention, with respect to the act itself. And, 2. The state of the understanding, or perceptive faculties, with regard to the circumstances which it is, or may appear to be, accompanied with. Now with respect to these circumstances, the perceptive faculty is susceptible of three states: consciousness, unconsciousness, and false consciousness. Consciousness, when the party believes precisely those circumstances, and no others, to subsist, which really do subsist: unconsciousness, when he fails of perceiving certain circumstances to subsist, which, however, do subsist: false consciousness, when he believes or imagines certain circumstances to subsist, which in truth do not subsist.

 In every transaction, therefore, which is examined with a view to punishment, there are four articles to be considered: 1. The act itself, which is done. 2. The circumstances in which it is done. 3. The intentionality that may have accompanied it. 4. The consciousness, unconsciousness, or false consciousness, that may have accompanied it.

What regards the act and the circumstances will be the subject of the present chapter: what regards intention and consciousness, that of the two succeeding.

 There are also two other articles on which the general tendency of an act depends: and on that, as well as on other accounts, the demand which it creates for punishment. These are, 1. The particular motive or motives which gave birth to it. 2. The general disposition which it indicates. These articles will be the subject of two other chapters.

 Acts may be distinguished in several ways, for several purposes.

They may be distinguished, in the first place, into positive and negative. By positive are meant such as consist in motion or exertion: by negative, such as consist in keeping at rest; that is, in forbearing to move or exert one's self in such and such circumstances. Thus, to strike is a positive act: not to strike on a certain occasion, a negative one. Positive acts are styled also acts of commission; negative, acts of omission or forbearance.
59

 Such acts, again, as are negative, may either be absolutely so, or relatively: absolutely, when they import the negation of all positive agency whatsoever; for instance, not to strike at all: relatively, when they import the negation of such or such a particular mode of agency; for instance, not to strike such a person or such a thing, or in such a direction.

 It is to be observed, that the nature of the act, whether positive or negative, is not to be determined immediately by the form of the discourse made use of to express it. An act which is positive in its nature may be characterized by a negative expression: thus, not to be at rest, is as much as to say to move. So also an act, which is negative in its nature, may be characterized by a positive expression: thus, to forbear or omit to bring food to a person in certain circumstances, is signified by the single and positive term to starve.

 In the second place, acts may be distinguished into external and internal. By external, are meant corporal acts; acts of the body: by internal, mental acts; acts of the mind. Thus, to strike is an external or exterior
60
 act: to intend to strike, an internal or interior one.

 Acts of discourse are a sort of mixture of the two: external acts, which are no ways material, nor attended with any consequences, any farther than as they serve to express the existence of internal ones. To speak to another to strike, to write to him to strike, to make signs to him to strike, are all so many acts of discourse.

 Third, Acts that are external may be distinguished into transitive and intransitive. Acts may be called transitive, when the motion is communicated from the person of the agent to some foreign body: that is, to such a foreign body on which the effects of it are considered as being material; as where a man runs against you, or throws water in your face. Acts may be called intransitive, when the motion is communicated to no other body, on which the effects of it are regarded as material, than some part of the same person in whom it originated, as where a man runs, or washes himself.
61

 An act of the transitive kind may be said to be in its commencement, or in the first stage of its progress, while the motion is confined to the person of the agent, and has not yet been communicated to any foreign body, on which the effects of it can be material. It may be said to be in its termination, or to be in the last stage of its progress, as soon as the motion or impulse has been communicated to some such foreign body. It may be said to be in the middle or intermediate stage or stages of its progress, while the motion, having passed from the person of the agent, has not yet been communicated to any such foreign body. Thus, as soon as a man has lifted up his hand to strike, the act he performs in striking you is in its commencement: as soon as his hand has reached you, it is in its termination. If the act be the motion of a body which is separated from the person of the agent before it reaches the object, it may be said, during that interval, to be in its intermediate progress,
62
 or in gradu mediativo: as in the case where a man throws a stone or fires a bullet at you.

 An act of the intransitive kind may be said to be in its commencement, when the motion or impulse is as yet confined to the member or organ in which it originated; and has not yet been communicated to any member or organ that is distinguishable from the former. It may be said to be in its termination, as soon as it has been applied to any other part of the same person. Thus, where a man poisons himself, while he is lifting up the poison to his mouth, the act is in its commencement: as soon as it has reached his lips, it is in its termination.
63

 In the third place, acts may be distinguished into transient and continued. Thus, to strike is a transient act: to lean, a continued one. To buy, a transient act: to keep in one's possession, a continued one.

 In strictness of speech there is a difference between a continued act and a repetition of acts. It is a repetition of acts, when there are intervals filled up by acts of different natures: a continued act, when there are no such intervals. Thus, to lean, is continued act: to keep striking, a repetition of acts.

 There is a difference, again, between a repetition of acts, and a habit or practice. The term repetition of acts may be employed, let the acts in question be separated by ever such short intervals, and let the sum total of them occupy ever so short a space of time. The term habit is not employed but when the acts in question are supposed to be separated by long-continued intervals, and the sum total of them to occupy a considerable space of time. It is not (for instance) the drinking ever so many times, nor ever so much at a time, in the course of the same sitting, that will constitute a habit of drunkenness: it is necessary that such sittings themselves be frequently repeated. Every habit is a repetition of acts; or, to speak more strictly, when a man has frequently repeated such and such acts after considerable intervals, he is said to have persevered in or contracted a habit: but every repetition of acts is not a habit.
64

 Fourth, acts may be distinguished into indivisible and divisible. Indivisible acts are merely imaginary: they may be easily conceived, but can never be known to be exemplified. Such as are divisible may be so, with regard either to matter or to motion. An act indivisible with regard to matter, is the motion or rest of one single atom of matter. An act indivisible, with regard to motion, is the motion of any body, from one single atom of space to the next to it.

Fifth, acts may be distinguished into simple and complex: simple, such as the act of striking, the act of leaning, or the act of drinking, above instanced: complex, consisting each of a multitude of simple acts, which, though numerous and heterogeneous, derive a sort of unity from the relation they bear to some common design or end; such as the act of giving a dinner, the act of maintaining a child, the act of exhibiting a triumph, the act of bearing arms, the act of holding a court, and so forth.

 It has been every now and then made a question, what it is in such a case that constitutes one act: where one act has ended, and another act has begun: whether what has happened has been one act or many.
65
 These questions, it is now evident, may frequently be answered, with equal propriety, in opposite ways: and if there be any occasions on which they can be answered only in one way, the answer will depend upon the nature of the occasion, and the purpose for which the question is proposed. A man is wounded in two fingers at one stroke—Is it one wound or several? A man is beaten at 12 o'clock, and again at 8 minutes after 12—Is it one beating or several? You beat one man, and instantly in the same breath you beat another—Is this one beating or several? In any of these cases it may be one, perhaps, as to some purposes, and several as to others. These examples are given, that men may be aware of the ambiguity of language: and neither harass themselves with unsolvable doubts, nor one another with interminable disputes.

 So much with regard to acts considered in themselves: we come now to speak of the circumstances with which they may have been accompanied. These must necessarily be taken into the account before any thing can be determined relative to the consequences. What the consequences of an act may be upon the whole can never otherwise be ascertained: it can never be known whether it is beneficial, or indifferent, or mischievous. In some circumstances even to kill a man may be a beneficial act: in others, to set food before him may be a pernicious one.

 Now the circumstances of an act, are, what? Any objects
66
 whatsoever. Take any act whatsoever, there is nothing in the nature of things that excludes any imaginable object from being a circumstance to it. Any given object may be a circumstance to any other.
67

 We have already had occasion to make mention for a moment of the consequences of an act: these were distinguished into material and immaterial. In like manner may the circumstances of it be distinguished. Now materiality is a relative term: applied to the consequences of an act, it bore relation to pain and pleasure: applied to the circumstances, it bears relation to the consequences. A circumstance may be said to be material, when it bears a visible relation in point of causality to the consequences: immaterial, when it bears no such visible relation.

 The consequences of an act are events.
68
 A circumstance may be related to an event in point of causality in any one of four ways: 1. In the way of causation or production. 2. In the way of derivation. 3. In the way of collateral condition. 4. In the way of conjunct influence. It may be said to be related to the event in the way of causation, when it is of the number of those that contribute to the production of such event: in the way of derivation, when it is of the number of the events to the production of which that in question has been contributory: in the way of collateral connexion, where the circumstance in question, and the event in question, without being either of them instrumental in the production of the other, are related, each of them, to some common object, which has been concerned in the production of them both: in the way of conjunct influence, when, whether related in any other way or not, they have both of them concurred in the production of some common consequence.

 An example may be of use. In the year 1628, Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, favourite and minister of Charles  of England, received a wound and died. The man who gave it him was one Felton, who, exasperated at the mal-administration of which that minister was accused, went down from London to Portsmouth, where Buckingham happened then to be, made his way into his anti-chamber, and finding him busily engaged in conversation with a number of people round him, got close to him, drew a knife and stabbed him. In the effort, the assassin's hat fell off, which was found soon after, and, upon searching him, the bloody knife. In the crown of the hat were found scraps of paper, with sentences expressive of the purpose he was come upon. Here then, suppose the event in question is the wound received by Buckingham: Felton's drawing out his knife, his making his way into the chamber, his going down to Portsmouth, his conceiving an indignation at the idea of Buckingham's administration, that administration itself, Charles's appointing such a minister, and so on, higher and higher without end, are so many circumstances, related to the event of Buckingham's receiving the wound, in the way of causation or production: the bloodiness of the knife, a circumstance related to the same event in the way of derivation: the finding of the hat upon the ground, the finding the sentences in the hat, and the writing them, so many circumstances related to it in the way of collateral connexion: and the situation and conversations of the people about Buckingham, were circumstances related to the circumstances of Felton's making his way into the room, going down to Portsmouth, and so forth, in the way of conjunct influence; inasmuch as they contributed in common to the event of Buckingham's receiving the wound, by preventing him from putting himself upon his guard upon the first appearance of the intruder.
69

 These several relations do not all of them attach upon an event with equal certainty. In the first place, it is plain, indeed, that every event must have some circumstance or other, and in truth, an indefinite multitude of circumstances, related to it in the way of production: it must of course have a still greater multitude of circumstances related to it in the way of collateral connexion. But it does not appear necessary that every event should have circumstances related to it in the way of derivation: nor therefore that it should have any related to it in the way of conjunct influence. But of the circumstances of all kinds which actually do attach upon an event, it is only a very small number that can be discovered by the utmost exertion of the human faculties: it is a still smaller number that ever actually do attract our notice: when occasion happens, more or fewer of them will be discovered by a man in proportion to the strength, partly of his intellectual powers, partly of his inclination.
70
 It appears therefore that the multitude and description of such of the circumstances belonging to an act, as may appear to be material, will be determined by two considerations: 1. By the nature of things themselves. 2. By the strength or weakness of the faculties of those who happen to consider them.

 Thus much it seemed necessary to premise in general concerning acts, and their circumstances, previously to the consideration of the particular sorts of acts with their particular circumstances, with which we shall have to do in the body of the work. An act of some sort or other is necessarily included in the notion of every offense. Together with this act, under the notion of the same offense, are included certain circumstances: which circumstances enter into the essence of the offense, contribute by their conjunct influence to the production of its consequences, and in conjunction with the act are brought into view by the name by which it stands distinguished. These we shall have occasion to distinguish hereafter by the name of criminative circumstances.
71
 Other circumstances again entering into combination with the act and the former set of circumstances, are productive of still farther consequences. These additional consequences, if they are of the beneficial kind, bestow, according to the value they bear in that capacity, upon the circumstances to which they owe their birth the appellation of exculpative
72
 or extenuative circumstances:
73
 if of the mischievous kind, they bestow on them the appellation of aggravative circumstances.
74
 Of all these different sets of circumstances, the criminative are connected with the consequences of the original offence, in the way of production; with the act, and with one another, in the way of conjunct influence: the consequences of the original offense with them, and with the act respectively, in the way of derivation: the consequences of the modified offense, with the criminative, exculpative, and extenuative circumstances respectively, in the way also of derivation: these different sets of circumstances, with the consequences of the modified act or offense, in the way of production: and with one another (in respect of the consequences of the modified act or offense) in the way of conjunct influence. Lastly, whatever circumstances can be seen to be connected with the consequences of the offense, whether directly in the way of derivation, or obliquely in the way of collateral affinity (to wit, in virtue of its being connected, in the way of derivation, with some of the circumstances with which they stand connected in the same manner) bear a material relation to the offense in the way of evidence, they may accordingly be styled evidentiary circumstances, and may become of use, by being held forth upon occasion as so many proofs, indications, or evidences of its having been committed.
75

Chapter VIII: OF INTENTIONALITY
 So much with regard to the two first of the articles upon which the evil tendency of an action may depend: viz. the act itself, and the general assemblage of the circumstances with which it may have been accompanied. We come now to consider the ways in which the particular circumstance of intention may be concerned in it.

 First, then, the intention or will may regard either of two objects: 1. The act itself: or, 2. Its consequences. Of these objects, that which the intention regards may be styled intentional. If it regards the act, then the act may be said to be intentional:
76
 if the consequences, so also then may the consequences. If it regards both the act and consequences, the whole action may be said to be intentional. Whichever of those articles is not the object of the intention, may of course be said to be unintentional.

 The act may very easily be intentional without the consequences; and often is so. Thus, you may intend to touch a man without intending to hurt him: and yet, as the consequences turn out, you may chance to hurt him.

 The consequences of an act may also be intentional, without the act's being intentional throughout; that is, without its being intentional in every stage of it: but this is not so frequent a case as the former. You intend to hurt a man, suppose, by running against him, and pushing him down: and you run towards him accordingly: but a second man coming in on a sudden between you and the first man, before you can stop yourself, you run against the second man, and by him push down the first.

 But the consequences of an act cannot be intentional, without the act's being itself intentional in at least the first stage. If the act be not intentional in the first stage, it is no act of yours: there is accordingly no intention on your part to produce the consequences: that is to say, the individual consequences. All there can have been on your part is a distant intention to produce other consequences, of the same nature, by some act of yours, at a future time: or else, without any intention, a bare wish to see such event take place. The second man, suppose, runs of his own accord against the first, and pushes him down. You had intentions of doing a thing of the same nature: viz. To run against him, and push him down yourself; but you had done nothing in pursuance of those intentions: the individual consequences therefore of the act, which the second man performed in pushing down the first, cannot be said to have been on your part intentional.
77

 Second. A consequence, when it is intentional, may either be directly so, or only obliquely. It may be said to be directly or lineally intentional, when the prospect of producing it constituted one of the links in the chain of causes by which the person was determined to do the act. It may be said to be obliquely or collaterally intentional, when, although the consequence was in contemplation, and appeared likely to ensue in case of the act's being performed, yet the prospect of producing such consequence did not constitute a link in the aforesaid chain.

 Third. An incident, which is directly intentional, may either be ultimately so, or only mediately. It may be said to be ultimately intentional, when it stands last of all exterior events in the aforesaid chain of motives; insomuch that the prospect of the production of such incident, could there be a certainty of its taking place, would be sufficient to determine the will, without the prospect of its producing any other. It may be said to be mediately intentional, and no more, when there is some other incident, the prospect of producing which forms a subsequent link in the same chain: insomuch that the prospect of producing the former would not have operated as a motive, but for the tendency which it seemed to have towards the production of the latter.

 Fourth. When an incident is directly intentional, it may either be exclusively so, or inexclusively. It may be said to be exclusively intentional, when no other but that very individual incident would have answered the purpose, insomuch that no other incident had any share in determining the will to the act in question. It may be said to have been inexclusively
78
 intentional, when there was some other incident, the prospect of which was acting upon the will at the same time.

 Fifth. When an incident is inexclusively intentional, it may be either conjunctively so, disjunctively, or indiscriminately. It may be said to be conjunctively intentional with regard to such other incident, when the intention is to produce both: disjunctively, when the intention is to produce either the one or the other indifferently, but not both: indiscriminately, when the intention is indifferently to produce either the one or the other, or both, as it may happen.

 Sixth. When two incidents are disjunctively intentional, they may be so with or without preference. They may be said to be so with preference, when the intention is, that one of them in particular should happen rather than the other: without preference, when the intention is equally fulfilled, whichever of them happens.
79

 One example will make all this clear. William  king of England, being out a stag-hunting, received from Sir Walter Tyrrel a wound, of which he died.
80
 Let us take this case, and diversify it with a variety of suppositions, correspondent to the distinctions just laid down.

1. First then, Tyrrel did not so much as entertain a thought of the king's death; or, if he did, looked upon it as an event of which there was no danger. In either of these cases the incident of his killing the king was altogether unintentional.

2. He saw a stag running that way, and he saw the king riding that way at the same time: what he aimed at was to kill the stag: he did not wish to kill the king: at the same time he saw, that if he shot, it was as likely he should kill the king as the stag: yet for all that he shot, and killed the king accordingly. In this case the incident of his killing the king was intentional, but obliquely so.

3. He killed the king on account of the hatred he bore him, and for no other reason than the pleasure of destroying him. In this case the incident of the king's death was not only directly but ultimately intentional.

4. He killed the king, intending fully so to do; not for any hatred he bore him, but for the sake of plundering him when dead. In this case the incident of the king's death was directly intentional, but not ultimately: it was mediately intentional.

5. He intended neither more nor less than to kill the king. He had no other aim nor wish. In this case it was exclusively as well as directly intentional: exclusively, to wit, with regard to every other material incident.

6. Sir Walter shot the king in the right leg, as he was plucking a thorn out of it with his left hand. His intention was, by shooting the arrow into his leg through his hand, to cripple him in both those limbs at the same time. In this case the incident of the king's being shot in the leg was intentional: and that conjunctively with another which did not happen; viz. his being shot in the hand.

7. The intention of Tyrrel was to shoot the king either in the hand or in the leg, but not in both; and rather in the hand than in the leg. In this case the intention of shooting in the hand was disjunctively concurrent, with regard to the other incident, and that with preference.

8. His intention was to shoot the king either in the leg or the hand, whichever might happen: but not in both. In this case the intention was inexclusive, but disjunctively so: yet that, however, without preference.

9. His intention was to shoot the king either in the leg or the hand, or in both, as it might happen. In this case the intention was indiscriminately concurrent, with respect to the two incidents.

 It is to be observed, that an act may be unintentional in any stage or stages of it, though intentional in the preceding: and, on the other hand, it may be intentional in any stage or stages of it, and yet unintentional in the succeeding.
81
 But whether it be intentional or no in any preceding stage, is immaterial, with respect to the consequences, so it be unintentional in the last. The only point, with respect to which it is material, is the proof. The more stages the act is unintentional in, the more apparent it will commonly be, that it was unintentional with respect to the last. If a man, intending to strike you on the cheek, strikes you in the eye, and puts it out, it will probably be difficult for him to prove that it was not his intention to strike you in the eye. It will probably be easier, if his intention was really not to strike you, or even not to strike at all.

 It is frequent to hear men speak of a good intention, of a bad intention; of the goodness and badness of a man's intention: a circumstance on which great stress is generally laid. It is indeed of no small importance, when properly understood: but the import of it is to the last degree ambiguous and obscure. Strictly speaking, nothing can be said to be good or bad, but either in itself; which is the case only with pain or pleasure: or on account of its effects; which the case only with things that are the causes or preventives of pain and pleasure. But in a figurative and less proper way of speech, a thing may also be styled good or bad, in consideration of its cause. Now the effects of an intention to do such or such an act, are the same objects which we have been speaking of under the appellation of its consequences: and the causes of intention are called motives. A man's intention then on any occasion may be styled good or bad, with reference either to the consequences of the act, or with reference to his motives. If it be deemed good or bad in any sense, it must be either because it is deemed to be productive of good or of bad consequences, or because it is deemed to originate from a good or from a bad motive. But the goodness or badness of the consequences depend upon the circumstances. Now the circumstances are no objects of the intention. A man intends the act: and by his intention produces the act: but as to the circumstances, he does not intend them: he does not, inasmuch as they are circumstances of it, produce them. If by accident there be a few which he has been instrumental in producing, it has been by former intentions, directed to former acts, productive of those circumstances as the consequences: at the time in question he takes them as he finds them. Acts, with their consequences, are objects of the will as well as of the understanding: circumstances, as such, are objects of the understanding only. All he can do with these, as such, is to know or not to know them: in other words, to be conscious of them, or not conscious. To the title of Consciousness belongs what is to be said of the goodness or badness of a man's intention, as resulting from the consequences of the act: and to the head of Motives, what is to be said of his intention, as resulting from the motive.

Chapter IX: OF CONSCIOUSNESS
 So far with regard to the ways in which the will or intention may be concerned in the production of any incident: we come now to consider the part which the understanding or perceptive faculty may have borne, with relation to such incident.

 A certain act has been done, and that intentionally: that act was attended with certain circumstances: upon these circumstances depended certain of its consequences; and amongst the rest, all those which were of a nature purely physical. Now then, take any one of these circumstances, it is plain, that a man, at the time of doing the act from whence such consequences ensued, may have been either conscious, with respect to this circumstance, or unconscious. In other words, he may either have been aware of the circumstance, or not aware: it may either have been present to his mind, or not present. In the first case, the act may be said to have been an advised act, with respect to that circumstance: in the other case, an unadvised one.

 There are two points, with regard to which an act may have been advised or unadvised: 1. The existence of the circumstance itself. 2. The materiality of it.
82

 It is manifest, that with reference to the time of the act, such circumstance may have been either present, past, or future.

 An act which is unadvised, is either heedless, or not heedless. It is termed heedless, when the case is thought to be such, that a person of ordinary prudence,
83
 if prompted by an ordinary share of benevolence, would have been likely to have bestowed such and so much attention and reflection upon the material circumstances, as would have effectually disposed him to prevent the mischievous incident from taking place: not heedless, when the case is not thought to be such as above mentioned.
84

 Again. Whether a man did or did not suppose the existence or materiality of a given circumstance, it may be that he did suppose the existence and materiality of some circumstance, which either did not exist, or which, though existing, was not material. In such case the act may be said to be mis-advised, with respect to such imagined circumstance: and it may be said, that there has been an erroneous supposition, or a mis-supposal in the case.

 Now a circumstance, the existence of which is thus erroneously supposed, may be material either, 1. In the way of prevention: or, 2. In that of compensation. It may be said to be material in the way of prevention, when its effect or tendency, had it existed, would have been to prevent the obnoxious consequences: in the way of compensation, when that effect or tendency would have been to produce other consequences, the beneficialness of which would have out-weighed the mischievousness of the others.

 It is manifest that, with reference to the time of the act, such imaginary circumstance may in either case have been supposed either to be present, past, or future.

 To return to the example exhibited in the preceding chapter.

10. Tyrrel intended to shoot in the direction in which he shot; but he did not know that the king was riding so near that way. In this case the act he performed in shooting, the act of shooting, was unadvised, with respect to the existence of the circumstance of the king's being so near riding that way.

11. He knew that the king was riding that way: but at the distance at which the king was, he knew not of the probability there was that the arrow would reach him. In this case the act was unadvised, with respect to the materiality of the circumstance.

12. Somebody had dipped the arrow in poison, without Tyrrel's knowing of it. In this case the act was unadvised, with respect to the existence of a past circumstance.

13. At the very instant that Tyrrel drew the bow, the king being screened from his view by the foliage of some bushes, was riding furiously, in such manner as to meet the arrow in a direct line: which circumstance was also more than Tyrrel knew of. In this case the act was unadvised, with respect to the existence of a present circumstance.

14. The king being at a distance from court, could get nobody to dress his wound till the next day; of which circumstance Tyrrel was not aware. In this case the act was unadvised, with respect to what was then future circumstance.

15. Tyrrel knew of the king's being riding that way, of his being so near, and so forth; but being deceived by the foliage of the bushes, he thought he saw a bank between the spot from which he shot, and that to which the king was riding. In this case the act was mis-advised, proceeding on the mis-supposal of a preventive circumstance.

16. Tyrrel knew that every thing was as above, nor was he deceived by the supposition of any preventive circumstance. But he believed the king to be an usurper: and supposed he was coming up to attack a person whom Tyrrel believed to be the rightful king, and who was riding by Tyrrel's side. In this case the act was also mis-advised, but proceeded on the mis-supposal of a compensative circumstance.

 Let us observe the connexion there is between intentionality and consciousness. When the act itself is intentional, and with respect to the existence of all the circumstances advised, as also with respect to the materiality of those circumstances, in relation to a given consequence, and there is no mis-supposal with regard to any preventive circumstance, that consequence must also be intentional: in other words; advisedness, with respect to the circumstances, if clear from the mis-supposal of any preventive circumstance, extends the intentionality from the act to the consequences. Those consequences may be either directly intentional, or only obliquely so: but at any rate they cannot but be intentional.

 To go on with the example. If Tyrrel intended to shoot in the direction in which the king was riding up, and knew that the king was coming to meet the arrow, and knew the probability there was of his being shot in that same part in which he was shot, or in another as dangerous, and with that same degree of force, and so forth, and was not misled by the erroneous supposition of a circumstance by which the shot would have been prevented from taking place, or any such other preventive circumstance, it is plain he could not but have intended the king's death. Perhaps he did not positively wish it; but for all that, in a certain sense he intended it.

 What heedlessness is in the case of an unadvised act, rashness is in the case of a misadvised one. A misadvised act then may be either rash or not rash. It may be termed rash, when the case is thought to be such, that a person of ordinary prudence, if prompted by an ordinary share of benevolence, would have employed such and so much attention and reflection to the imagined circumstance, as, by discovering to him the nonexistence, improbability, or immateriality of it, would have effectually disposed him to prevent the mischievous incident from taking place.

 In ordinary discourse, when a man does an act of which the consequences prove mischievous, it is a common thing to speak of him as having acted with a good intention or, with a bad intention, of his intention's being a good one or a bad one. The epithets good and bad are all this while applied, we see, to the intention: but the application of them is most commonly governed by a supposition formed with regard to the nature of the motive. The act, though eventually it prove mischievous, is said to be done with a good intention, when it is supposed to issue from a motive which is looked upon as a good motive: with a bad intention, when it is supposed to be the result of a motive which is looked upon as a bad motive. But the nature of the consequences intended, and the nature of the motive which gave birth to the intention, are objects which, though intimately connected, are perfectly distinguishable. The intention might therefore with perfect propriety be styled a good one, whatever were the motive. It might be styled a good one, when not only the consequences of the act prove mischievous, but the motive which gave birth to it was what is called a bad one. To warrant the speaking of the intention as being a good one, it is sufficient if the consequences of the act, had they proved what to the agent they seemed likely to be, would have been of a beneficial nature. And in the same manner the intention may be bad, when not only the consequences of the act prove beneficial, but the motive which gave birth to it was a good one.

 Now, when a man has a mind to speak of your intention as being good or bad, with reference to the consequences, if he speaks of it at all he must use the word intention, for there is no other. But if a man means to speak of the motive from which your intention originated, as being a good or a bad one, he is certainly not obliged to use the word intention: it is at least as well to use the word motive. By the supposition he means the motive; and very likely he may not mean the intention. For what is true of the one is very often not true of the other. The motive may be good when the intention is bad: the intention may be good when the motive is bad: whether they are both good or both bad, or the one good and the other bad, makes, as we shall see hereafter, a very essential difference with regard to the consequences.
85
 It is therefore much better, when motive is meant, never to say intention.

 An example will make this clear. Out of malice a man prosecutes you for a crime of which he believes you to be guilty, but of which in fact you are not guilty. Here the consequences of his conduct are mischievous: for they are mischievous to you at any rate, in virtue of the shame and anxiety which you are made to suffer while the prosecution is depending: to which is to be added, in case of your being convicted, the evil of the punishment. To you therefore they are mischievous; nor is there any one to whom they are beneficial. The man's motive was also what is called a bad one: for malice will be allowed by every body to be a bad motive. However, the consequences of his conduct, had they proved such as he believed them likely to be, would have been good: for in them would have been included the punishment of a criminal, which is a benefit to all who are exposed to suffer by a crime of the like nature. The intention therefore, in this case, though not in a common way of speaking the motive, might be styled a good one. But of motives more particularly in the next chapter.

 In the same sense the intention, whether it be positively good or no, so long as it is not bad, may be termed innocent. Accordingly, let the consequences have proved mischievous, and let the motive have been what it will, the intention may be termed innocent in either of two cases: 1. In the case of unadvisedness with respect to any of the circumstances on which the mischievousness of the consequences depended: 2. In the case of mis-advisedness with respect to any circumstance, which, had it been what it appeared to be, would have served either to prevent or to outweigh the mischief.

 A few words for the purpose of applying what has been said to the Roman law. Unintentionality, and innocence of intention, seem both to be included in the case of infortunium, where there is neither dolus nor culpa. Unadvisedness coupled with heedlessness, and mis-advisedness coupled with rashness, correspond to the culpa sine dolo. Direct intentionality corresponds to dolus. Oblique intentionality seems hardly to have been distinguished from direct; were it to occur, it would probably be deemed also to correspond to dolus. The division into culpa, lata, levis, and levissima, is such as nothing certain can correspond to. What is it that it expresses? A distinction, not in the case itself, but only in the sentiments which any person (a judge, for instance) may find himself disposed to entertain with relation to it: supposing it already distinguished into three subordinate cases by other means.

The word dolus seems ill enough contrived: the word culpa as indifferently. Dolus, upon any other occasion, would be understood to imply deceit, concealment,
86
 clandestinity:
87
 but here it is extended to open force. Culpa, upon any other occasion, would be understood to extend to blame of every kind. It would therefore include dolus.
88

 The above-mentioned definitions and distinctions are far from being mere matters of speculation. They are capable of the most extensive and constant application, as well to moral discourse as to legislative practice. Upon the degree and bias of a man's intention, upon the absence or presence of consciousness or mis-supposal, depend a great part of the good and bad, more especially of the bad consequences of an act; and on this, as well as other grounds, a great part of the demand for punishment.
89
 The presence of intention with regard to such or such a consequence, and of consciousness with regard to such or such a circumstance, of the act, will form so many criminative circumstances,
90
 or essential ingredients in the composition of this or that offence: applied to other circumstances, consciousness will form a ground of aggravation, annexable to the like offence.
91
 In almost all cases, the absence of intention with regard to certain consequences and the absence of consciousness, or the presence of mis-supposal, with regard to certain circumstances, will constitute so many grounds of extenuation.
92

Chapter X: OF MOTIVES
&sect; 1. Different senses of the word motive.
1
 It is an acknowledged truth, that every kind of act whatever, and consequently every kind of offense, is apt to assume a different character, and be attended with different effects, according to the nature of the motive which gives birth to it. This makes it requisite to take a view of the several motives by which human conduct is liable to be influenced.

 By a motive, in the most extensive sense in which the word is ever used with reference to a thinking being, is meant any thing that can contribute to give birth to, or even to prevent, any kind of action. Now the actions of a thinking being is the act either of the body, or only of the mind: and an act of the mind is an act either of the intellectual faculty, or of the will. Acts of the intellectual faculty will sometimes rest in the understanding merely, without exerting any influence in the production of any acts of the will. Motives, which are not of a nature to influence any other acts than those, may be styled purely speculative motives, or motives resting in speculation. But as to these acts, neither do they exercise any influence over external acts, or over their consequences, nor consequently over any pain or any pleasure that may be in the number of such consequences. Now it is only on account of their tendency to produce either pain or pleasure, that any acts can be material. With acts, therefore, that rest purely in the understanding, we have not here any concern: nor therefore with any object, if any such there be, which, in the character of a motive, can have no influence on any other acts than those.

 The motives with which alone we have any concern are such as are of a nature to act upon the will. By a motive then, in this sense of the word, is to be understood any thing whatsoever, which, by influencing the will of a sensitive being, is supposed to serve as a means of determining him to act, or voluntarily to forbear to act,
2
 upon any occasion. Motives of this sort, in contradistinction to the former, may be styled practical motives, or motives applying to practice.

 Owing to the poverty and unsettled state of language, the word motive is employed indiscriminately to denote two kinds of objects, which, for the better understanding of the subject, it is necessary should be distinguished. On some occasions it is employed to denote any of those really existing incidents from whence the act in question is supposed to take its rise. The sense it bears on these occasions may be styled its literal or unfigurative sense. On other occasions it is employed to denote a certain fictitious entity, a passion, an affection of the mind, an ideal being which upon the happening of any such incident is considered as operating upon the mind, and prompting it to take that course, towards which it is impelled by the influence of such incident. Motives of this class are Avarice, Indolence, Benevolence, and so forth; as we shall see more particularly farther on. This latter may be styled the figurative sense of the term motive.

 As to the real incidents to which the name of motive is also given, these too are of two very different kinds. They may be either, 1. The internal perception of any individual lot of pleasure or pain, the expectation of which is looked upon as calculated to determine you to act in such or such a manner; as the pleasure of acquiring such a sum of money, the pain of exerting yourself on such an occasion, and so forth: or, 2. Any external event, the happening whereof is regarded as having a tendency to bring about the perception of such pleasure or such pain; for instance, the coming up of a lottery ticket, by which the possession of the money devolves to you; or the breaking out of a fire in the house you are in, which makes it necessary for you to quit it. The former kind of motives may be termed interior, or internal: the latter exterior, or external.

 Two other senses of the term motive need also to be distinguished. Motive refers necessarily to action. It is a pleasure, pain, or other event, that prompts to action. Motive then, in one sense of the word, must be previous to such event. But, for a man to be governed by any motive, he must in every case look beyond that event which is called his action; he must look to the consequences of it: and it is only in this way that the idea of pleasure, of pain, or of any other event, can give birth to it. He must look, therefore, in every case, to some event posterior to the act in contemplation: an event which as yet exists not, but stands only in prospect. Now, as it is in all cases difficult, and in most cases unnecessary, to distinguish between objects so intimately connected, as the posterior possible object which is thus looked forward to, and the present existing object or event which takes place upon a man's looking forward to the other, they are both of them spoken of under the same appellation, motive. To distinguish them, the one first mentioned may be termed a motive in prospect, the other a motive in esse: and under each of these denominations will come as well exterior as internal motives. A fire breaks out in your neighbour's house: you are under apprehension of its extending to your own: you are apprehensive, that if you stay in it, you will be burnt: you accordingly run out of it. This then is the act: the others are all motives to it. The event of the fire's breaking out in your neighbour's house is an external motive, and that in esse: the idea or belief of the probability of the fire's extending to your own house, that of your being burnt if you continue, and the pain you feel at the thought of such a catastrophe, are all so many internal events, but still in esse: the event of the fire's actually extending to your own house, and that of your being actually burnt by it, external motives in prospect: the pain you would feel at seeing your house a burning, and the pain you would feel while you yourself were burning, internal motives in prospect: which events, according as the matter turns out, may come to be in esse: but then of course they will cease to act as motives.

 Of all these motives, which stand nearest to the act, to the production of which they all contribute, is that internal motive in esse which consists in the expectation of the internal motive in prospect: the pain or uneasiness you feel at the thoughts of being burnt.
3
 All other motives are more or less remote: the motives in prospect, in proportion as the period at which they are expected to happen is more distant from the period at which the act takes place, and consequently later in point of time: the motives in esse, in proportion as they also are more distant from that period, and consequently earlier in point of time.
4

 It has already been observed, that with motives of which the influence terminates altogether in the understanding, we have nothing here to do. If then, amongst objects that are spoken of as motives with reference to the understanding, there be any which concern us here, it is only in as far as such objects may, through the medium of the understanding, exercise an influence over the will. It is in this way, and in this way only, that any objects, in virtue of any tendency they may have to influence the sentiment of belief, may in a practical sense act in the character of motives. Any objects, by tending to induce a belief concerning the existence, actual, or probable, of a practical motive; that is, concerning the probability of a motive in prospect, or the existence of a motive in esse; may exercise an influence on the will, and rank with those other motives that have been placed under the name of practical. The pointing out of motives such as these, is what we frequently mean when we talk of giving reasons. Your neighbour's house is on fire as before. I observe to you, that at the lower part of your neighbour's house is some wood-work, which joins on to yours; that the flames have caught this wood-work, and so forth; which I do in order to dispose you to believe as I believe, that if you stay in your house much longer you will be burnt. In doing this, then, I suggest motives to your understanding; which motives, by the tendency they have to give birth to or strengthen a pain, which operates upon you in the character of an internal motive in esse, join their force, and act as motives upon the will.

&sect; 2.
No motives either constantly good or constantly bad.
 In all this chain of motives, the principal or original link seems to be the last internal motive in prospect: it is to this that all the other motives in prospect owe their materiality: and the immediately acting motive its existence. This motive in prospect, we see, is always some pleasure, or some pain; some pleasure, which the act in question is expected to be a means of continuing or producing: some pain which it is expected to be a means of discontinuing or preventing. A motive is substantially nothing more than pleasure or pain, operating in a certain manner.

 Now, pleasure is in itself a good: nay, even setting aside immunity from pain, the only good: pain is in itself an evil; and, indeed, without exception, the only evil; or else the words good and evil have no meaning. And this is alike true of every sort of pain, and of every sort of pleasure. It follows, therefore, immediately and incontestibly, that there is no such thing as any sort of motive that is in itself a bad one.
5

 It is common, however, to speak of actions as proceeding from good or bad motives: in which case the motives meant are such as are internal. The expression is far from being an accurate one; and as it is apt to occur in the consideration of most every kind of offence, it will be requisite to settle the precise meaning of it, and observe how far it quadrates with the truth of things.

 With respect to goodness and badness, as it is with everything else that is not itself either pain or pleasure, so is it with motives. If they are good or bad, it is only on account of their effects: good, on account of their tendency to produce pleasure, or avert pain: bad, on account of their tendency to produce pain, or avert pleasure. Now the case is, that from one and the same motive, and from every kind of motive, may proceed actions that are good, others that are bad, and others that are indifferent. This we shall proceed to shew with respect to all the different kinds of motives, as determined by the various kinds of pleasures and pains.

 Such an analysis, useful as it is, will be found to be a matter of no small difficulty owing, in great measure, to a certain perversity of structure which prevails more or less throughout all languages. To speak of motives, as of anything else, one must call them by their names. But the misfortune is, that it is rare to meet with a motive of which the name expresses that and nothing more. Commonly along with the very name of the motive, is tacitly involved a proposition imputing to it a certain quality; a quality which, in many cases, will appear to include that very goodness or badness, concerning which we are here inquiring whether, properly speaking, it be or be not imputable to motives. To use the common phrase, in most cases, the name of the motive is a word which is employed either only in a good sense, or else only in a bad sense. Now, when a word is spoken of as being used in a good sense, all that is necessarily meant is this: that in conjunction with the idea of the object it is put to signify, it conveys an idea of approbation: that is, of a pleasure or satisfaction, entertained by the person who employs the term at the thoughts of such object. In like manner, when a word is spoken of as being used in a bad sense, all that is necessarily meant is this: that, in conjunction with the idea of the object it is put to signify, it conveys an idea of disapprobation: that is, of a displeasure entertained by the person who employs the term at the thoughts of such object. Now, the circumstance on which such approbation is grounded will, as naturally as any other, be the opinion of the goodness of the object in question, as above explained: such, at least, it must be, upon the principle of utility: so, on the other hand, the circumstance on which any such disapprobation is grounded, will, as naturally as any other, be the opinion of the badness of the object: such, at least, it must be, in as far as the principle of utility is taken for the standard.

Now there are certain motives which, unless in a few particular cases, have scarcely any other name to be expressed by but such a word as is used only in a good sense. This is the case, for example, with the motives of piety and honour. The consequence of this is, that if, in speaking of such a motive, a man should have occasion to apply the epithet bad to any actions which he mentions as apt to result from it, he must appear to be guilty of a contradiction in terms. But the names of motives which have scarcely any other name to be expressed by, but such a word as is used only in a bad sense, are many more.
6
 This is the case, for example, with the motives of lust and avarice. And accordingly, if in speaking of any such motive, a man should have occasion to apply the epithets good or indifferent to any actions which he mentions as apt to result from it, he must here also appear to be guilty of a similar contradiction.
7

This perverse association of ideas cannot, it is evident, but throw great difficulties in the way of the inquiry now before us. Confining himself to the language most in use, a man can scarce avoid running, in appearance, into perpetual contradictions. His propositions will appear, on the one hand, repugnant to truth; and on the other hand, adverse to utility. As paradoxes, they will excite contempt: as mischievous paradoxes, indignation. For the truths he labours to convey, however important, and however salutary, his reader is never the better: and he himself is much the worse. To obviate this inconvenience, completely, he has but this one unpleasant remedy; to lay aside the old phraseology and invent a new one. Happy the man whose language is ductile enough to permit him this resource. To palliate the inconvenience, where that method of obviating it is impracticable, he has nothing left for it but to enter into a long discussion, to state the whole matter at large, to confess, that for the sake of promoting the purposes, he has violated the established laws of language, and to throw himself upon the mercy of his readers.
8

&sect; 3.
Catalogue of motives corresponding to that of Pleasures and Pains.
 From the pleasures of the senses, considered in the gross, results the motive which, in a neutral sense, maybe termed physical desire: in a bad sense, it is termed sensuality. Name used in a good sense it has none. Of this, nothing can be determined, till it be considered separately, with reference to the several species of pleasures to which it corresponds.

 In particular, then, to the pleasures of the taste or palate corresponds a motive, which in a neutral sense having received no name that can serve to express it in all cases, can only be termed, by circumlocution, the love of the pleasures of the palate. In particular cases it is styled hunger: in others, thirst.
9
 The love of good cheer expresses this motive, but seems to go beyond: intimating, that the pleasure is to be partaken of in company, and involving a kind of sympathy. In a bad sense, it is styled in some cases greediness, voraciousness, gluttony: in others, principally when applied to children, lickerishness. It may in some cases also be represented by the word daintiness. Name used in a good sense it has none. 1. A boy, who does not want for victuals, steals a cake out of a pastry-cook's shop, and eats it. In this case his motive will be universally deemed a bad one: and if it be asked what it is, it may be answered, perhaps, lickerishness. 2. A boy buys a cake out of a pastry-cook's shop, and eats it. In this case his motive can scarcely be looked upon as either good or bad, unless his master should be out of humour with him; and then perhaps he may call it lickerishness, as before. In both cases, however, his motive is the same. It is neither more nor less than the motive corresponding to the pleasures of the palate.
10

 To the pleasures of the sexual sense corresponds the motive which, in a neutral sense, may be termed sexual desire. In a bad sense, it is spoken of under the name of lasciviousness, and a variety of other names of reprobation. Name used in a good sense it has none.
11

1. A man ravishes a virgin. In this case the motive is, without scruple, termed by the name of lust, lasciviousness, and so forth; and is universally looked upon as a bad one. 2. The same man, at another time, exercises the rights of marriage with his wife. In this case the motive is accounted, perhaps, a good one, or at least indifferent: and here people would scruple to call it by any of those names. In both cases, however, the motive may be precisely the same. In both cases it may be neither more nor less than sexual desire.

 To the pleasures of curiosity corresponds the motive known by the same name: and which may be otherwise called the love of novelty, or the love of experiment; and, on particular occasions, sport, and sometimes play.

1. A boy, in order to divert himself, reads an improving book: the motive is accounted, perhaps, a good one: at any rate not a bad one. 2. He sets his top a spinning: the motive is deemed, at any rate, not a bad one. 3. He sets loose a mad ox among a crowd; his motive is now, perhaps, termed an abominable one. Yet in all three cases the motive may be the very same: it may be neither more nor less than curiosity.

 As to the other pleasures of sense they are of too little consequence to have given any separate denominations to the corresponding motives.

 To the pleasures of wealth corresponds the sort of motive which, in a neutral sense, may be termed pecuniary interest: in a bad sense, it is termed, in some cases, avarice, covetousness, rapacity, or lucre: in other cases, niggardliness: in a good sense, but only in particular cases, economy and frugality; and in some cases the word industry may be applied to it: in a sense nearly indifferent, but rather bad than otherwise, it is styled, though only in particular cases, parsimony.

1. For money you gratify a man's hatred, by putting his adversary to death. 2. For money you plough his field for him.—In the first case your motive is termed lucre, and is accounted corrupt and abominable: and in the second, for want of a proper appellation, it is styled industry; and is looked upon as innocent at least, if not meritorious. Yet the motive is in both cases precisely the same: it is neither more nor less than pecuniary interest.

 The pleasures of skill are neither distinct enough, nor of consequence enough, to have given any name to the corresponding motive.

 To the pleasures of amity corresponds a motive which, in a neutral sense, may be termed the desire of ingratiating one's self. In a bad sense it is in certain cases styled servility: in a good sense it has no name that is peculiar to it: in the cases in which it has been looked on with a favourable eye, it has seldom been distinguished from the motive of sympathy or benevolence, with which, in such cases, it is commonly associated.

1. To acquire the affections of a woman before marriage, to preserve them afterwards, you do every thing, that is consistent with other duties, to make her happy: in this case your motive is looked upon as laudable, though there is no name for it. 2. For the same purpose, you poison a woman with whom she is at enmity: in this case your motive is looked upon as abominable, though still there is no name for it. 3. To acquire or preserve the favour of a man who is richer or more powerful than yourself, you make yourself subservient to his pleasures. Let them even be lawful pleasures, if people choose to attribute your behaviour to this motive, you will not get them to find any other name for it than servility. Yet in all three cases the motive is the same: it is neither more nor less than the desire of ingratiating yourself.

 To the pleasures of the moral sanction, or, as they may otherwise be called, the pleasures of a good name, corresponds a motive which, in a neutral sense, has scarcely yet obtained any adequate appellative. It may be styled, the love of reputation. It is nearly related to the motive last preceding: being neither more nor less than the desire of ingratiating one's self with, or, as in this case we should rather say, of recommending one's self to, the world at large. In a good sense, it is termed honour, or the sense of honour: or rather, the word honour is introduced somehow or other upon the occasion of its being brought to view: for in strictness the word honour is put rather to signify that imaginary object, which a man is spoken of as possessing upon the occasion of his obtaining a conspicuous share of the pleasures that are in question. In particular cases, it is styled the love of glory. In a bad sense, it is styled, in some cases, false honour; in others, pride; in others, vanity. In a sense not decidedly bad, but rather bad than otherwise, ambition. In an indifferent sense, in some cases, the love of fame: in others, the sense of shame. And, as the pleasures belonging to the moral sanction run undistinguishably into the pains derived from the same source,
12
 it may also be styled, in some cases, the fear of dishonour, the fear of disgrace, the fear of infamy, the fear of ignominy, or the fear of shame.

1. You have received an affront from a man: according to the custom of the country, in order, on the one hand, to save yourself from the shame of being thought to bear it patiently;
13
 on the other hand, to obtain the reputation of courage; you challenge him to fight with mortal weapons. In this case your motive will by some people be accounted laudable, and styled honour: by others it will be accounted blameable, and these, if they call it honour, will prefix an epithet of improbation to it, and call it false honour. 2. In order to obtain a post of rank and dignity, and thereby to increase the respects paid you by the public, you bribe the electors who are to confer it, or the judge before whom the title to it is in dispute. In this case your motive is commonly accounted corrupt and abominable, and is styled, perhaps, by some such name as dishonest or corrupt ambition, as there is no single name for it. 3. In order to obtain the good-will of the public, you bestow a large sum in works of private charity or public utility. In this case people will be apt not to agree about your motive. Your enemies will put a bad colour upon it, and call it ostentation: your friends, to save you from this reproach, will choose to impute your conduct not to this motive but to some other: such as that of charity (the denomination in this case given to private sympathy) or that of public spirit. 4. A king, for the sake of gaining the admiration annexed to the name of conqueror (we will suppose power and resentment out of the question) engages his kingdom in a bloody war. His motive, by the multitude (whose sympathy for millions is easily overborne by the pleasure which their imagination finds in gaping at any novelty they observe in the conduct of a single person) is deemed an admirable one. Men of feeling and reflection, who disapprove of the dominion exercised by this motive on this occasion, without always perceiving that it is the same motive which in other instances meets with their approbation, deem it an abominable one; and because the multitude, who are the manufacturers of language, have not given them a simple name to call it by, they will call it by some such compound name as the love of false glory or false ambition. Yet in all four cases the motive is the same: it is neither more nor less than the love of reputation.

 To the pleasures of power corresponds the motive which, in a neutral sense, may be termed the love of power. People, who are out of humour with it sometimes, call it the lust of power. In a good sense, it is scarcely provided with a name. In certain cases this motive, as well as the love of reputation, are confounded under the same name, ambition. This is not to be wondered at, considering the intimate connexion there is between the two motives in many cases: since it commonly happens, that the same object which affords the one sort of pleasure, affords the other sort at the same time: for instance, offices, which are at once posts of honour and places of trust: and since at any rate reputation is the road to power.

1. If, in order to gain a place in administration, you poison the man who occupies it. 2. If, in the same view, you propose a salutary plan for the advancement of the public welfare; your motive is in both cases the same. Yet in the first case it is accounted criminal and abominable: in the second case allowable, and even laudable.

 To the pleasures as well as to the pains of the religious sanction corresponds a motive which has, strictly speaking, no perfectly neutral name applicable to all cases, unless the word religion be admitted in this character: though the word religion, strictly speaking, seems to mean not so much the motive itself, as a kind of fictitious personage, by whom the motive is supposed to be created, or an assemblage of acts, supposed to be dictated by that personage: nor does it seem to be completely settled into a neutral sense. In the same sense it is also, in some cases, styled religious zeal: in other cases, the fear of God. The love of God, though commonly contrasted with the fear of God, does not come strictly under this head. It coincides properly with a motive of a different denomination; viz. a kind of sympathy or good-will, which has the Deity for its object. In a good sense, it is styled devotion, piety, and pious zeal. In a bad sense, it is styled, in some cases, superstition, or superstitious zeal: in other cases, fanaticism, or fanatic zeal: in a sense not decidedly bad, because not appropriated to this motive, enthusiasm, or enthusiastic zeal.

1. In order to obtain the favour of the Supreme Being, a man assassinates his lawful sovereign. In this case the motive is now almost universally looked upon as abominable, and is termed fanaticism: formerly it was by great numbers accounted laudable, and was by them called pious zeal. 2. In the same view, a man lashes himself with thongs. In this case, in yonder house, the motive is accounted laudable, and is called pious zeal: in the next house it is deemed contemptible, and called superstition. 3. In the same view, a man eats a piece of bread (or at least what to external appearance is a piece of bread) with certain ceremonies. In this case, in yonder house, his motive is looked upon as laudable, and is styled piety and devotion: in the next house it is deemed abominable, and styled superstition, as before: perhaps even it is absurdly styled impiety. 4. In the same view, a man holds a cow by the tail while he is dying. On the Thames the motive would in this case be deemed contemptible, and called superstition. On the Ganges it is deemed meritorious, and called piety. 5. In the same view, a man bestows a large sum in works of charity, or public utility. In this case the motive is styled laudable, by those at least to whom the works in question appear to come under this description: and by these at least it would be styled piety. Yet in all these cases the motive is precisely the same: it is neither more nor less than the motive belonging to the religious sanction.
14

 To the pleasures of sympathy corresponds the motive which, in a neutral sense, is termed good-will. The word sympathy may also be used on this occasion: though the sense of it seems to be rather more extensive. In a good sense, it is styled benevolence: and in certain cases, philanthropy; and, in a figurative way, brotherly love; in others, humanity; in others, charity; in others, pity and compassion; in others, mercy; in others, gratitude; in others, tenderness; in others, patriotism; in others, public spirit. Love is also employed in this as in so many other senses. In a bad sense, it has no name applicable to it in all cases: in particular cases it is styled partiality. The word zeal, with certain epithets prefixed to it, might also be employed sometimes on this occasion, though the sense of it be more extensive; applying sometimes to ill as well as to good will. It is thus we speak of party zeal, national zeal, and public zeal. The word attachment is also used with the like epithets: we also say family-attachment. The French expression, esprit de corps, for which as yet there seems to be scarcely any name in English, might be rendered, in some cases, though rather inadequately, by the terms corporation spirit, corporation attachment, or corporation zeal.

1. A man who has set a town on fire is apprehended and committed: out of regard or compassion for him, you help him to break prison. In this case the generality of people will probably scarcely know whether to condemn your motive or to applaud it: those who condemn your conduct, will be disposed rather to impute it to some other motive: if they style it benevolence or compassion, they will be for prefixing an epithet, and calling it false benevolence or false compassion.
15
 2. The man is taken again, and is put upon his trial: to save him you swear falsely in his favour. People, who would not call your motive a bad one before, will perhaps call it so now. 3. A man is at law with you about an estate: he has no right to it: the judge knows this, yet, having an esteem or affection for your adversary, adjudges it to him. In this case the motive is by every body deemed abominable, and is termed injustice and partiality. 4. You detect a statesman in receiving bribes: out of regard to the public interest, you give information of it, and prosecute him. In this case, by all who acknowledge your conduct to have originated from this motive, your motive will be deemed a laudable one, and styled public spirit. But his friends and adherents will not choose to account for your conduct in any such manner: they will rather attribute it to party enmity. 5. You find a man on the point of starving: you relieve him; and save his life. In this case your motive will by every body be accounted laudable, and it will be termed compassion, pity, charity, benevolence. Yet in all these cases the motive is the same: it is neither more nor less than the motive of good-will.

 To the pleasures of malevolence, or antipathy, corresponds the motive which, in a neutral sense, is termed antipathy or displeasure: and, in particular cases, dislike, aversion, abhorrence, and indignation: in a neutral sense, or perhaps a sense leaning a little to the bad side, ill-will: and, in particular cases, anger, wrath, and enmity. In a bad sense it is styled, in different cases, wrath, spleen, ill-humour, hatred, malice, rancour, rage, fury, cruelty, tyranny, envy, jealousy, revenge, misanthropy, and by other names, which it is hardly worth while to endeavour to collect.
16
 Like good-will, it is used with epithets expressive of the persons who are the objects of the affection. Hence we hear of party enmity, party rage, and so forth. In a good sense there seems to be no single name for it. In compound expressions it may be spoken of in such a sense, by epithets, such as just and laudable, prefixed to words that are used in a neutral or nearly neutral sense.

1. You rob a man: he prosecutes you, and gets you punished: out of resentment you set upon him, and hang him with your own hands. In this case your motive will universally be deemed detestable, and will be called malice, cruelty, revenge, and so forth. 2. A man has stolen a little money from you: out of resentment you prosecute him, and get him hanged by course of law. In this case people will probably be a little divided in their opinions about your motive: your friends will deem it a laudable one, and call it a just or laudable resentment: your enemies will perhaps be disposed to deem it blameable, and call it cruelty, malice, revenge, and so forth: to obviate which, your friends will try perhaps to change the motive, and call it public spirit. 3. A man has murdered your father: out of resentment you prosecute him, and get him put to death in course of law. In this case your motive will be universally deemed a laudable one, and styled, as before, a just or laudable resentment: and your friends, in order to bring forward the more amiable principle from which the malevolent one, which was your immediate motive, took its rise, will be for keeping the latter out of sight, speaking of the former only, under some such name as filial piety. Yet in all these cases the motive is the same: it is neither more nor less than the motive of ill-will.

 To the several sorts of pains, or at least to all such of them as are conceived to subsist in an intense degree, and to death, which, as far as we can perceive, is the termination of all the pleasures, as well as all the pains we are acquainted with, corresponds the motive, which in a neutral sense is styled, in general, self-preservation: the desire of preserving one's self from the pain or evil in question. Now in many instances the desire of pleasure, and the sense of pain, run into one another undistinguishably. Self-preservation, therefore, where the degree of the pain which it corresponds to is but slight will scarcely be distinguishable, by any precise line, from the motives corresponding to the several sorts of pleasures. Thus in the case of the pains of hunger and thirst: physical want will in many cases be scarcely distinguishable from physical desire. In some cases it is styled, still in a neutral sense, self-defence. Between the pleasures and the pains of the moral and religious sanctions, and consequently of the motives that correspond to them, as likewise between the pleasures of amity, and the pains of enmity, this want of boundaries has already been taken notice of.
17
 The case is the same between the pleasures of wealth, and the pains of privation corresponding to those pleasures. There are many cases, therefore, in which it will be difficult to distinguish the motive of self-preservation from pecuniary interest, from the desire of ingratiating one's self, from the love of reputation, and from religious hope: in which cases, those more specific and explicit names will naturally be preferred to this general and inexplicit one. There are also a multitude of compound names, which either are already in use, or might be devised, to distinguish the specific branches of the motive of self-preservation from those several motives of a pleasurable origin: such as the fear of poverty, the fear of losing such or such a man's regard, the fear of shame, and the fear of God. Moreover, to the evil of death corresponds, in a neutral sense, the love of life; in a bad sense, cowardice: which corresponds also to the pains of the senses, at least when considered as subsisting in an acute degree. There seems to be no name for the love of life that has a good sense; unless it be the vague and general name of prudence.

1. To save yourself from being hanged, pilloried, imprisoned, or fined, you poison the only person who can give evidence against you. In this case your motive will universally be styled abominable: but as the term self-preservation has no bad sense, people will not care to make this use of it: they will be apt rather to change the motive, and call it malice. 2. A woman, having been just delivered of an illegitimate child, in order to save herself from shame, destroys the child, or abandons it. In this case, also, people will call the motive a bad one, and, not caring to speak of it under a neutral name, they will be apt to change the motive, and call it by some such name as cruelty. 3. To save the expense of a halfpenny, you suffer a man, whom you could preserve at that expense, to perish with want, before your eyes. In this case your motive will be universally deemed an abominable one; and, to avoid calling it by so indulgent a name as self-preservation, people will be apt to call it avarice and niggardliness, with which indeed in this case it indistinguishably coincides: for the sake of finding a more reproachful appellation, they will be apt likewise to change the motive, and term it cruelty. 4. To put an end to the pain of hunger, you steal a loaf of bread. In this case your motive will scarcely, perhaps, be deemed a very bad one; and, in order to express more indulgence for it, people will be apt to find a stronger name for it than self-preservation, terming it necessity. 5. To save yourself from drowning, you beat off an innocent man who has got hold of the same plank. In this case your motive will in general be deemed neither good nor bad, and it will be termed self-preservation, or necessity, or the love of life. 6. To save your life from a gang of robbers, you kill them in the conflict. In this case the motive may, perhaps, be deemed rather laudable than otherwise, and, besides self-preservation, is styled also self-defence. 7. A soldier is sent out upon a party against a weaker party of the enemy: before he gets up with them, to save his life, he runs away. In this case the motive will universally be deemed a contemptible one, and will be called cowardice. Yet in all these various cases, the motive is still the same. It is neither more nor less than self-preservation.

 In particular, to the pains of exertion corresponds the motive, which, in a neutral sense, may be termed the love of ease, or by a longer circumlocution, the desire of avoiding trouble. In a bad sense, it is termed indolence.
18
 It seems to have no name that carries with it a good sense.

1. To save the trouble of taking care of it, a parent leaves his child to perish. In this case the motive will be deemed an abominable one, and, because indolence will seem too mild a name for it, the motive will, perhaps, be changed, and spoken of under some such term as cruelty. 2. To save yourself from an illegal slavery, you make your escape. In this case the motive will be deemed certainly not a bad one: and, because indolence, or even the love of ease, will be thought too unfavourable a name for it, it will, perhaps, be styled the love of liberty. 3. A mechanic, in order to save his labour, makes an improvement in his machinery. In this case, people will look upon his motive as a good one; and finding no name for it that carries a good sense, they will be disposed to keep the motive out of sight: they will speak rather of his ingenuity, than of the motive which was the means of his manifesting that quality. Yet in all these cases the motive is the same: it is neither more nor less than the love of ease.

 It appears then that there is no such thing as any sort of motive which is a bad one in itself: nor, consequently, any such thing as a sort of motive, which in itself is exclusively a good one. And as to their effects, it appears too that these are sometimes bad, at other times either indifferent or good: and this appears to be the case with every sort of motive. If any sort of motive then is either good or bad on the score of its effects, this is the case only on individual occasions, and with individual motives; and this is the case with one sort of motive as well as with another. If any sort of motive then can, in consideration of its effects, be termed with any propriety a bad one, it can only be with reference to the balance of all the effects it may have had of both kinds within a given period, that is, of its most usual tendency.

 What then? (it will be said) are not lust, cruelty, avarice, bad motives? Is there so much as any one individual occasion, in which motives like these can be otherwise than bad? No, certainly: and yet the proposition, that there is no one sort of motive but what will on many occasions be a good one, is nevertheless true. The fact is, that these are names which, if properly applied, are never applied but in the cases where the motives they signify happen to be bad. The names of those motives, considered apart from their effects, are sexual desire, displeasure, and pecuniary interest. To sexual desire, when the effects of it are looked upon as bad, is given the name of lust. Now lust is always a bad motive. Why? Because if the case be such, that the effects of the motive are not bad, it does not go, or at least ought not to go, by the name of lust. The case is, then, that when I say, 'Lust is a bad motive,' it is a proposition that merely concerns the import of the word lust; and which would be false if transferred to the other word used for the same motive, sexual desire. Hence we see the emptiness of all those rhapsodies of common-place morality, which consist in the taking of such names as lust, cruelty, and avarice, and branding them with marks of reprobation: applied to the thing, they are false; applied to the name, they are true indeed, but nugatory. Would you do a real service to mankind, show them the cases in which sexual desire merits the name of lust; displeasure, that of cruelty; and pecuniary interest, that of avarice.

 If it were necessary to apply such denominations as good, bad, and indifferent to motives, they might be classed in the following manner, in consideration of the most frequent complexion of their effects. In the class of good motives might be placed the articles of, 1. Good-will. 2. Love of reputation. 3. Desire of amity. And, 4. Religion. In the class of bad motives, 5. Displeasure. In the class of neutral or indifferent motives, 6. Physical desire. 7. Pecuniary interest. 8. Love of power. 9. Self-preservation; as including the fear of the pains of the senses, the love of ease, and the love of life.

 This method of arrangement, however, cannot but be imperfect; and the nomenclature belonging to it is in danger of being fallacious. For by what method of investigation can a man be assured, that with regard to the motives ranked under the name of good, the good effects they have had, from the beginning of the world, have, in each of the four species comprised under this name, been superior to the bad? still more difficulty would a man find in assuring himself, that with regard to those which are ranked under the name of neutral or indifferent, the effects they have had have exactly balanced each other, the value of the good being neither greater nor less than that of the bad. It is to be considered, that the interests of the person himself can no more be left out of the estimate, than those of the rest of the community. For what would become of the species, if it were not for the motives of hunger and thirst, sexual desire, the fear of pain, and the love of life? Nor in the actual constitution of human nature is the motive of displeasure less necessary, perhaps, than any of the others: although a system, in which the business of life might be carried on without it, might possibly be conceived. It seems, therefore, that they could scarcely, without great danger of mistakes, be distinguished in this manner even with reference to each other.

 The only way, it should seem, in which a motive can with safety and propriety be styled good or bad, is with reference to its effects in each individual instance; and principally from the intention it gives birth to: from which arise, as will be shown hereafter, the most material part of its effects. A motive is good, when the intention it gives birth to is a good one; bad, when the intention is a bad one: and an intention is good or bad, according to the material consequences that are the objects of it. So far is it from the goodness of the intention's being to be known only from the species of the motive. But from one and the same motive, as we have seen, may result intentions of every sort of complexion whatsoever. This circumstance, therefore, can afford no clue for the arrangement of the several sorts of motives.

 A more commodious method, therefore, it should seem, would be to distribute them according to the influence which they appear to have on the interests of the other members of the community, laying those of the party himself out of the question: to wit, according to the tendency which they appear to have to unite, or disunite, his interests and theirs. On this plan they may be distinguished into social, dissocial, and self-regarding. In the social class may be reckoned, 1. Good-will. 2. Love of reputation. 3. Desire of amity. 4. Religion. In the dissocial may be placed, 5. Displeasure. In the self-regarding class, 6. Physical desire. 7. Pecuniary interest. 8. Love of power. 9. Self-preservation; as including the fear of the pains of the senses, the love of ease, and the love of life.

 With respect to the motives that have been termed social, if any farther distinction should be of use, to that of good-will alone may be applied the epithet of purely-social; while the love of reputation, the desire of amity, and the motive of religion, may together be comprised under the division of semi-social: the social tendency being much more constant and unequivocal in the former than in any of the three latter. Indeed these last, social as they may be termed, are self-regarding at the same time.
19

&sect; 4.
Order of pre-eminence among motives.
 Of all these sorts of motives, good-will is that of which the dictates,
20
 taken in a general view, are surest of coinciding with those of the principle of utility. For the dictates of utility are neither more nor less than the dictates of the most extensive
21
 and enlightened (that is well-advised
22
) benevolence. The dictates of the other motives may be conformable to those of utility, or repugnant, as it may happen.

 In this, however, it is taken for granted, that in the case in question the dictates of benevolence are not contradicted by those of a more extensive, that is enlarged, benevolence. Now when the dictates of benevolence, as respecting the interests of a certain set of persons, are repugnant to the dictates of the same motive, as respecting the more important
23
 interests of another set of persons, the former dictates, it is evident, are repealed, as it were, by the latter: and a man, were he to be governed by the former, could scarcely, with propriety, be said to be governed by the dictates of benevolence. On this account were the motives on both sides sure to be alike present to a man's mind, the case of such a repugnancy would hardly be worth distinguishing, since the partial benevolence might be considered as swallowed up in the more extensive: if the former prevailed, and governed the action, it must be considered as not owing its birth to benevolence, but to some other motive: if the latter prevailed, the former might be considered as having no effect. But the case is, that a partial benevolence may govern the action, without entering into any direct competition with the more extensive benevolence, which would forbid it; because the interests of the less numerous assemblage of persons may be present to a man's mind, at a time when those of the more numerous are either not present, or, if present, make no impression. It is in this way that the dictates of this motive may be repugnant to utility, yet still be the dictates of benevolence. What makes those of private benevolence conformable upon the whole to the principle of utility, is, that in general they stand unopposed by those of public: if they are repugnant to them, it is only by accident. What makes them the more conformable, is, that in a civilized society, in most of the cases in which they would of themselves be apt to run counter to those of public benevolence, they find themselves opposed by stronger motives of the self-regarding class, which are played off against them by the laws; and that it is only in cases where they stand unopposed by the other more salutary dictates, that they are left free. An act of injustice or cruelty, committed by a man for the sake of his father or his son, is punished, and with reason, as much as if it were committed for his own.

 After good-will, the motive of which the dictates seem to have the next best chance for coinciding with those of utility, is that of the love of reputation. There is but one circumstance which prevents the dictates of this motive from coinciding in all cases with those of the former. This is, that men in their likings and dislikings, in the dispositions they manifest to annex to any mode of conduct their approbation or their disapprobation, and in consequence to the person who appears to practice it, their good or their ill will, do not govern themselves exclusively by the principle of utility. Sometimes it is the principle of asceticism they are guided by: sometimes the principle of sympathy and antipathy. There is another circumstance, which diminishes, not their conformity to the principle of utility, but only their efficacy in comparison with the dictates of the motive of benevolence. The dictates of this motive will operate as strongly in secret as in public: whether it appears likely that the conduct which they recommend will be known or not: those of the love of reputation will coincide with those of benevolence only in proportion as a man's conduct seems likely to be known. This circumstance, however, does not make so much difference as at first sight might appear. Acts, in proportion as they are material, are apt to become known:
24
 and in point of reputation, the slightest suspicion often serves for proof. Besides, if an act be a disreputable one, it is not any assurance a man can have of the secrecy of the particular act in question, that will of course surmount the objections he may have against engaging in it. Though the act in question should remain secret, it will go towards forming a habit, which may give birth to other acts, that may not meet with the same good fortune. There is no human being, perhaps, who is at years of discretion, on whom considerations of this sort have not some weight: and they have the more weight upon a man, in proportion to the strength of his intellectual powers, and the firmness of his mind.
25
 Add to this, the influence which habit itself, when once formed, has in restraining a man from acts towards which, from the view of the disrepute annexed to them, as well as from any other cause, he has contracted an aversion. The influence of habit, in such cases, is a matter of fact, which, though not readily accounted for, is acknowledged and indubitable.
26

 After the dictates of the love of reputation come, as it should seem, those of the desire of amity. The former are disposed to coincide with those of utility, inasmuch as they are disposed to coincide with those of benevolence. Now those of the desire of amity are apt also to coincide, in a certain sort, with those of benevolence. But the sort of benevolence with the dictates of which the love of reputation coincides, is the more extensive; that with which those of the desire of amity coincide, the less extensive. Those of the love of amity have still, however, the advantage of those of the self-regarding motives. The former, at one period or other of his life, dispose a man to contribute to the happiness of a considerable number of persons: the latter, from the beginning of life to the end of it, confine themselves to the care of that single individual. The dictates of the desire of amity, it is plain, will approach nearer to a coincidence with those of the love of reputation, and thence with those of utility, in proportion, cæteris paribus, to the number of the persons whose amity a man has occasion to desire: and hence it is, for example, that an English member of parliament, with all his own weaknesses, and all the follies of the people whose amity he has to cultivate, is probably, in general, a better character than the secretary of a visier at Constantinople, or of a naïb in Indostan.

 The dictates of religion are, under the infinite diversity of religions, so extremely variable, that it is difficult to know what general account to give of them, or in what rank to place the motive they belong to. Upon the mention of religion, people's first thoughts turn naturally to the religion they themselves profess. This is a great source of miscalculation, and has a tendency to place this sort of motive in a higher rank than it deserves. The dictates of religion would coincide, in all cases, with those of utility, were the Being, who is the object of religion, universally supposed to be as benevolent as he is supposed to be wise and powerful; and were the notions entertained of his benevolence, at the same time, as correct as those which are entertained of his wisdom and his power. Unhappily, however, neither of these is the case. He is universally supposed to be all-powerful: for by the Deity, what else does any man mean than the Being, whatever he be, by whom every thing is done? And as to knowledge, by the same rule that he should know one thing he should know another. These notions seem to be as correct, for all material purposes, as they are universal. But among the votaries of religion (of which number the multifarious fraternity of Christians is but a small part) there seem to be but few (I will not say how few) who are real believers in his benevolence. They call him benevolent in words, but they do not mean that he is so in reality. They do not mean, that he is benevolent as man is conceived to be benevolent: they do not mean that he is benevolent in the only sense in which benevolence has a meaning. For if they did, they would recognize that the dictates of religion could be neither more nor less than the dictates of utility: not a tittle different: not a tittle less or more. But the case is, that on a thousand occasions they turn their backs on the principle of utility. They go astray after the strange principles its antagonists: sometimes it is the principle of asceticism: sometimes the principle of sympathy and antipathy.
27
 Accordingly, the idea they bear in their minds, on such occasions, is but too often the idea of malevolence; to which idea, stripping it of its own proper name, they bestow the specious appellation of the social motive.
28
 The dictates of religion, in short, are no other than the dictates of that principle which has been already mentioned under the name of the theological principle.
29
 These, as has been observed, are just as it may happen, according to the biases of the person in question, copies of the dictates of one or other of the three original principles: sometimes, indeed, of the dictates of utility: but frequently of those of asceticism, or those of sympathy and antipathy. In this respect they are only on a par with the dictates of the love of reputation: in another they are below it. The dictates of religion are in all places intermixed more or less with dictates unconformable to those of utility, deduced from tests, well or ill interpreted, of the writings held for sacred by each sect: unconformable, by imposing practices sometimes inconvenient to a man's self, sometimes pernicious to the rest of the community. The sufferings of uncalled martyrs, the calamities of holy wars and religious persecutions, the mischiefs of intolerant laws, (objects which can here only be glanced at, not detailed) are so many additional mischiefs over and above the number of those which were ever brought into the world by the love of reputation. On the other hand, it is manifest, that with respect to the power of operating in secret, the dictates of religion have the same advantage over those of the love of reputation, and the desire of amity, as is possessed by the dictates of benevolence.

 Happily, the dictates of religion seem to approach nearer and nearer to a coincidence with those of utility every day. But why? Because the dictates of the moral sanction do so: and those coincide with or are influenced by these. Men of the worst religions, influenced by the voice and practice of the surrounding world, borrow continually a new and a new leaf out of the book of utility: and with these, in order not to break with their religion, they endeavour, sometimes with violence enough, to patch together and adorn the repositories of their faith.

 As to the self-regarding and dissocial motives, the order that takes place among these, and the preceding one, in point of extra-regarding influence, is too evident to need insisting on. As to the order that takes place among the motives, of the self-regarding class, considered in comparison with one another, there seems to be no difference which on this occasion would be worth mentioning. With respect to the dissocial motive, it makes a difference (with regard to its extra-regarding effects) from which of two sources it originates; whether from self-regarding or from social considerations. The displeasure you conceive against a man may be founded either on some act which offends you in the first instance, or on an act which offends you no otherwise than because you look upon it as being prejudicial to some other party on whose behalf you interest yourself: which other party may be of course either a determinate individual, or any assemblage of individuals, determinate or indeterminate.
30
 It is obvious enough, that a motive, though in itself dissocial, may, by issuing from a social origin, possess a social tendency; and that its tendency, in this case, is likely to be the more social, the more enlarged the description is of the persons whose interests you espouse. Displeasure, venting itself against a man, on account of a mischief supposed to be done by him to the public, may be more social in its effects than any good-will, the exertions of which are confined to an individual.
31

&sect; 5.
Conflict among motives.
 When a man has it in contemplation to engage in any action, he is frequently acted upon at the same time by the force of divers motives: one motive, or set of motives, acting in one direction; another motive, or set of motives, acting as it were in an opposite direction. The motives on one side disposing him to engage in the action: those on the other, disposing him not to engage in it. Now, any motive, the influence of which tends to dispose him to engage in the action in question, may be termed an impelling motive: any motive, the influence of which tends to dispose him not to engage in it, a restraining motive. But these appellations may of course be interchanged, according as the act is of the positive kind, or the negative.
32

 It has been shown, that there is no sort of motive but may give birth to any sort of action. It follows, therefore, that there are no two motives but may come to be opposed to one another. Where the tendency of the act is bad, the most common case is for it to have been dictated by a motive either of the self-regarding, or of the dissocial class. In such case the motive of benevolence has commonly been acting, though ineffectually, in the character of a restraining motive.

 An example may be of use, to show the variety of contending motives, by which a man may be acted upon at the same time. Crillon, a Catholic (at a time when it was generally thought meritorious among Catholics to extirpate Protestants), was ordered by his king, Charles  of France, to fall privately upon Coligny, a Protestant, and assassinate him: his answer was, 'Excuse me, Sire; but I'll fight him with all my heart.'
33
 Here, then, were all the three forces above mentioned, including that of the political sanction, acting upon him at once. By the political sanction, or at least so much of the force of it as such a mandate, from such a sovereign, issued on such an occasion, might be supposed to carry with it, he was enjoined to put Coligny to death in the way of assassination: by the religious sanction, that is, by the dictates of religious zeal, he was enjoined to put him to death in any way: by the moral sanction, or in other words, by the dictates of honour, that is, of the love of reputation, he was permitted (which permission, when coupled with the mandates of his sovereign, operated, he conceived, as an injunction) to fight the adversary upon equal terms: by the dictates of enlarged benevolence (supposing the mandate to be unjustifiable) he was enjoined not to attempt his life in any way, but to remain at peace with him: supposing the mandate to be unjustifiable, by the dictates of private benevolence he was enjoined not to meddle with him at any rate. Among this confusion of repugnant dictates, Crillon, it seems, gave the preference, in the first place, to those of honour: in the next place, to those of benevolence. He would have fought, had his offer been accepted; as it was not, he remained at peace.

Here a multitude of questions might arise. Supposing the dictates of the political sanction to follow the mandate of the sovereign, of what kind were the motives which they afforded him for compliance? The answer is, of the self-regarding kind at any rate: inasmuch as, by the supposition, it was in the power of the sovereign to punish him for non-compliance, or reward him for compliance. Did they afford him the motive of religion (I mean independently of the circumstance of heresy above mentioned) the answer is, Yes, if his notion was, that it was God's pleasure he should comply with them; No, if it was not. Did they afford him the motive of the love of reputation? Yes, if it was his notion that the world would expect and require that he should comply with them: No, if it was not. Did they afford him that of benevolence? Yes, if it was his notion that the community would upon the whole be the better for his complying with them: No, if it was not. But did the dictates of the political sanction, in the case in question, actually follow the mandates of the sovereign: in other words, was such a mandate legal? This we see is a mere question of local jurisprudence, altogether foreign to the present purpose.

 What is here said about the goodness and badness of motives, is far from being a mere matter of words. There will be occasion to make use of it hereafter for various important purposes. I shall have need of it for the sake of dissipating various prejudices, which are of disservice to the community, sometimes by cherishing the flame of civil dissensions,
34
 at other times, by obstructing the course of justice. It will be shown, that in the case of many offences,
35
 the consideration of the motive is a most material one: for that in the first place it makes a very material difference in the magnitude of the mischief:
36
 in the next place, that it is easy to be ascertained; and thence may be made a ground for a difference in the demand for punishment: but that in other cases it is altogether incapable of being ascertained; and that, were it capable of being ever so well ascertained, good or bad, it could make no difference in the demand for punishment: that in all cases, the motive that may happen to govern a prosecutor, is a consideration totally immaterial: whence may be seen the mischievousness of the prejudice that is so apt to be entertained against informers; and the consequence it is of that the judge, in particular, should be proof against the influence of such delusions.

Lastly, The subject of motives is one with which it is necessary to be acquainted, in order to pass a judgment on any means that may be proposed for combating offenses in their source.
37

But before the theoretical foundation for these practical observations can be completely laid, it is necessary we should say something on the subject of disposition: which, accordingly, will furnish matter for the ensuing chapter.

Chapter XI: OF HUMAN DISPOSITIONS IN GENERAL
 In the foregoing chapter it has been shown at large, that goodness or badness cannot, with any propriety, be predicated of motives. Is there nothing then about a man that may properly be termed good or bad, when, on such or such an occasion; he suffers himself to be governed by such or such a motive? Yes, certainly: his disposition. Now disposition is a kind of fictitious entity, feigned for the convenience of discourse, in order to express what there is supposed to be permanent in a man's frame of mind, where, on such or such an occasion, he has been influenced by such or such a motive, to engage in an act, which, as it appeared to him, was of such or such a tendency.

 It is with disposition as with every thing else: it will be good or bad according to its effects: according to the effects it has in augmenting or diminishing the happiness of the community. A man's disposition may accordingly be considered in two points of view: according to the influence it has, either, 1. on his own happiness: or, 2. on the happiness of others. Viewed in both these lights together, or in either of them indiscriminately, it may be termed, on the one hand, good; on the other, bad; or, in flagrant cases, depraved.
38
 Viewed in the former of these lights, it has scarcely any peculiar name, which has as yet been appropriated to it. It might be termed, though but inexpressively, frail or infirm, on the one hand: sound or firm, on the other. Viewed in the other light, it might be termed beneficent, or meritorious, on the one hand: pernicious or mischievous, on the other. Now of that branch of a man's disposition, the effects of which regard in the first instance only himself, there needs not much to be said here. To reform it when bad, is the business rather of the moralist than the legislator: nor is it susceptible of those various modifications which make so material difference in the effects of the other. Again, with respect to that part of it, the effects whereof regard others in the first instance, it is only in as far as it is of a mischievous nature that the penal branch of law has any immediate concern with it: in as far as it may be of a beneficent nature, it belongs to a hitherto but little cultivated, and as yet unnamed branch of law, which might be styled the remuneratory.

 A man then is said to be of a mischievous disposition, when, by the influence of no matter what motives, he is presumed to be more apt to engage, or form intentions of engaging, in acts which are apparently of a pernicious tendency, than in such as are apparently of a beneficial tendency: of a meritorious or beneficent disposition in the opposite case.

 I say presumed: for, by the supposition, all that appears is one single action, attended with one single train of circumstances: but from that degree of consistency and uniformity which experience has shown to be observable in the different actions of the same person, the probable existence (past or future) of a number of acts of a similar nature, is naturally and justly inferred from the observation of one single one. Under such circumstances, such as the motive proves to be in one instance, such is the disposition to be presumed to be in others.

 I say apparently mischievous: that is, apparently with regard to him: such as to him appear to possess that tendency: for from the mere event, independent of what to him it appears beforehand likely to be, nothing can be inferred on either side. If to him it appears likely to be mischievous, in such case, though in the upshot it should prove innocent, or even beneficial, it makes no difference; there is not the less reason for presuming his disposition to be a bad one: if to him it appears likely to be beneficial or innocent, in such case, though in the upshot it should prove pernicious, there is not the more reason on that account for presuming his disposition to be a good one. And here we see the importance of the circumstances of intentionality,
39
 consciousness,
40
 unconsciousness,
40
 and mis-supposal.
40

 The truth of these positions depends upon two others, both of them sufficiently verified by experience: The one is, that in the ordinary course of things the consequences of actions commonly turn out conformable to intentions. A man who sets up a butcher's shop, and deals in beef, when he intends to knock down an ox, commonly does knock down an ox; though by some unlucky accident he may chance to miss his blow and knock down a man: he who sets up a grocer's shop, and deals sugar, when he intends to sell sugar, commonly does sell sugar: though by some unlucky accident he may chance to sell arsenic in the room of it.

 The other is, that a man who entertains intentions of doing mischief at one time is apt to entertain the like intentions at another.
41

 There are two circumstances upon which the nature of the disposition, as indicated by any act, is liable to depend: 1. The apparent tendency of the act: 2. The nature of the motive which gave birth to it. This dependency is subject to different rules, according to the nature of the motive. In stating them, I suppose all along the apparent tendency of the act to be, as it commonly is, the same as the real.

 1. Where the tendency of the act is good, and the motive is of the self-regarding kind. In this case the motive affords no inference on either side. It affords no indication of a good disposition: but neither does it afford any indication of a bad one.

A baker sells his bread to a hungry man who asks for it. This, we see, is one of those acts of which, in ordinary cases, the tendency is unquestionably good. The baker's motive is the ordinary commercial motive of pecuniary interest. It is plain, that there is nothing in the transaction, thus stated, that can afford the least ground for presuming that the baker is a better or a worse man than any of his neighbours.

 2. Where the tendency of the act is bad, and the motive, as before, is of the self-regarding kind. In this case the disposition indicated is a mischievous one.

A man steals bread out of a baker's shop: this is one of those acts of which the tendency will readily be acknowledged to be bad. Why, and in what respects it is so, will be stated farther on.
42
 His motive, we will say, is that of pecuniary interest; the desire of getting the value of the bread for nothing. His disposition, accordingly, appears to be a bad one: for every one will allow a thievish disposition to be a bad one.

 3. Where the tendency of the act is good, and the motive is the purely social one of good-will. In this case the disposition indicated is a beneficent one.

A baker gives a poor man a loaf of bread. His motive is compassion; a name given to the motive of benevolence, in particular cases of its operation. The disposition indicated by the baker, in this case, is such as every man will be ready enough to acknowledge to be a good one.

 4. Where the tendency of the act is bad, and the motive is the purely social one of good-will. Even in this case the disposition which the motive indicates is dubious: it may be a mischievous or a meritorious one, as it happens; according as the mischievousness of the act is more or less apparent.

 It may be thought, that a case of this sort cannot exist; and that to suppose it, is a contradiction in terms. For the act is one, which, by the supposition, the agent knows to be a mischievous one. How then can it be, that good-will, that is, the desire of doing good, could have been the motive that led him into it? To reconcile this, we must advert to the distinction between enlarged benevolence and confined.
43
 The motive that led him into it, was that of confined benevolence. Had he followed the dictates of enlarged benevolence, he would not have done what he did. Now, although he followed the dictates of that branch of benevolence, which in any single instance of its exertion is mischievous, when opposed to the other, yet, as the cases which call for the exertion of the former are, beyond comparison, more numerous than those which call for the exertion of the latter, the disposition indicated by him, in following the impulse of the former, will often be such as in a man, of the common run of men, may be allowed to be a good one upon the whole.

 A man with a numerous family of children, on the point of starving, goes into a baker's shop, steals a loaf, divides it all among the children, reserving none of it for himself. It will be hard to infer that that man's disposition is a mischievous one upon the whole. Alter the case, give him but one child, and that hungry perhaps, but in no imminent danger of starving: and now let the man set fire to a house full of people, for the sake of stealing money out of it to buy the bread with. The disposition here indicated will hardly be looked upon as a good one.

 Another case will appear more difficult to decide than either. Ravaillac assassinated one of the best and wisest of sovereigns, at a time when a good and wise sovereign, a blessing at all times so valuable to a state, was particularly precious: and that to the inhabitants of a populous and extensive empire. He is taken, and doomed to the most excruciating tortures. His son, well persuaded of his being a sincere penitent, and that mankind, in case of his being at large, would have nothing more to fear from him, effectuates his escape. Is this then a sign of a good disposition in the son, or of a bad one? Perhaps some will answer, of a bad one; for, besides the interest which the nation has in the sufferings of such a criminal, on the score of the example, the future good behaviour of such a criminal is more than any one can have sufficient ground to be persuaded of.

 Well then, let Ravaillac, the son, not facilitate his father's escape; but content himself with conveying poison to him, that at the price of an easier death he may escape his torments. The decision will now, perhaps, be more difficult. The act is a wrong one, let it be allowed, and such as ought by all means to be punished: but is the disposition manifested by it a bad one? Because the young man breaks the laws in this one instance, is it probable, that if let alone, he would break the laws in ordinary instances, for the satisfaction of any inordinate desires of his own? The answer of most men would probably be in the negative.

 5. Where the tendency of the act is good, and the motive is a semi-social one, the love of reputation. In this case the disposition indicated is a good one.

In a time of scarcity, a baker, for the sake of gaining the esteem of the neighbourhood, distributes bread gratis among the industrious poor. Let this be taken for granted: and let it be allowed to be a matter of uncertainty, whether he had any real feeling for the sufferings of those whom he has relieved, or no. His disposition, for all that, cannot, with any pretence of reason, be termed otherwise than a good and beneficent one. It can only be in consequence of some very idle prejudice, if it receives a different name.
44

 6. Where the tendency of the act is bad, and the motive, as before, is a semi-social one, the love of reputation. In this case, the disposition which it indicates is more or less good or bad: in the first place, according as the tendency of the act is more or less mischievous: in the next place according as the dictates of the moral sanction, in the society in question, approach more or less to a coincidence with those of utility. It does not seem probable, that in any nation, which is in a state of tolerable civilization, in short, in any nation in which such rules as these can come to be consulted, the dictates of the moral sanction will so far recede from a coincidence with those of utility (that is, of enlightened benevolence) that the disposition indicated in this case can be otherwise than a good one upon the whole.

 An Indian receives an injury, real or imaginary, from an Indian of another tribe. He revenges it upon the person of his antagonist with the most excruciating torments: the case being, that cruelties inflicted on such an occasion, gain him reputation in his own tribe. The disposition manifested in such a case can never be deemed a good one, among a people ever so few degrees advanced, in point of civilization, above the Indians.

 A nobleman (to come back to Europe) contracts a debt with a poor tradesman. The same nobleman, presently afterwards, contracts a debt, to the same amount, to another nobleman, at play. He is unable to pay both: he pays the whole debt to the companion of his amusements, and no part of it to the tradesman. The disposition manifested in this case can scarcely be termed otherwise than a bad one. It is certainly, however, not so bad as if he had paid neither. The principle of love of reputation, or (as it is called in the case of this partial application of it) honour, is here opposed to the worthier principle of benevolence, and gets the better of it. But it gets the better also of the self-regarding principle of pecuniary interest. The disposition, therefore, which it indicates, although not so good a one as that in which the principle of benevolence predominates, is better than one in which the principle of self-interest predominates. He would be the better for having more benevolence: but would he be the better for having no honour? This seems to admit of great dispute.
45

 7. Where the tendency of the act is good, and the motive is the semi-social one of religion. In this case, the disposition indicated by it (considered with respect to the influence of it on the man's conduct towards others) is manifestly a beneficent and meritorious one.

A baker distributes bread gratis among the industrious poor. It is not that he feels for their distresses: nor is it for the sake of gaining reputation among his neighbours. It is for the sake of gaining the favour of the Deity: to whom, he takes for granted, such conduct will be acceptable. The disposition manifested by such conduct is plainly what every man would call a good one.

 8. Where the tendency of the act is bad, and the motive is that of religion, as before. In this case the disposition is dubious. It is good or bad, and more or less good or bad, in the first place, as the tendency of the act is more or less mischievous; in the next place, according as the religious tenets of the person in question approach more or less to a coincidence with the dictates of utility.

 It should seem from history, that even in nations in a tolerable state of civilization in other respects, the dictates of religion have been found so far to recede from a coincidence with those of utility; in other words, from those of enlightened benevolence; that the disposition indicated in this case may even be a bad one upon the whole. This however is no objection to the inference which it affords of a good disposition in those countries (such as perhaps are most of the countries of Europe at present) in which its dictates respecting the conduct of a man towards other men approach very nearly to a coincidence with those of utility. The dictates of religion, in their application to the conduct of a man in what concerns himself alone, seem in most European nations to savour a good deal of the ascetic principle: but the obedience to such mistaken dictates indicates not any such disposition as is likely to break out into acts of pernicious tendency with respect to others. Instances in which the dictates of religion lead a man into acts which are pernicious in this latter view, seem at present to be but rare: unless it be acts of persecution, or impolitic measures on the part of government, where the law itself is either the principal actor or an accomplice in the mischief. Ravaillac, instigated by no other motive than this, gave his country one of the most fatal stabs that a country ever received from a single hand: but happily the Ravaillacs are but rare. They have been more frequent, however, in France than in any other country during the same period: and it is remarkable, that in every instance it is this motive that has produced them. When they do appear, however, nobody, I suppose, but such as themselves, will be for terming a disposition, such as they manifest, a good one. It seems hardly to be denied, but that they are just so much the worse for their notions of religion; and that had they been left to the sole guidance of benevolence, and the love of reputation, without any religion at all, it would have been but so much the better for mankind. One may say nearly the same thing, perhaps, of those persons who, without any particular obligation, have taken an active part in the execution of laws made for the punishment of those who have the misfortune to differ with the magistrate in matters of religion, much more of the legislator himself, who has put it in their power. If Louis  had had no religion, France would not have lost 800,000 of its most valuable subjects. The same thing may be said of the authors of the wars called holy ones; whether waged against persons called Infidels or persons branded with the still more odious name of Heretics. In Denmark, not a great many years ago, a sect is said to have arisen, who, by a strange perversion of reason, took it into their heads, that, by leading to repentance, murder, or any other horrid crime, might be made the road to heaven. It should all along, however, be observed, that instances of this latter kind were always rare: and that in almost all the countries of Europe, instances of the former kind, though once abundantly frequent, have for some time ceased. In certain countries, however, persecution at home, or (what produces a degree of restraint, which is one part of the mischiefs of persecution) I mean the disposition to persecute, whensoever occasion happens, is not yet at an end: insomuch that if there is no actual persecution, it is only because there are no heretics; and if there are no heretics, it is only because there are no thinkers.
46

 9. Where the tendency of the act is good, and the motive (as before) is the dissocial one of ill-will. In this case the motive seems not to afford any indication on either side. It is no indication of a good disposition; but neither is it any indication of a bad one.

You have detected a baker in selling short weight: you prosecute him for the cheat. It is not for the sake of gain that you engaged in the prosecution; for there is nothing to be got by it: it is not from public spirit: it is not for the sake of reputation; for there is no reputation to be got by it: it is not in the view of pleasing the Deity: it is merely on account of a quarrel you have with the man you prosecute. From the transaction, as thus stated, there does not seem to be any thing to be said either in favour of your disposition or against it. The tendency of the act is good: but you would not have engaged in it, had it not been from a motive which there seems no particular reason to conclude will ever prompt you to engage in an act of the same kind again. Your motive is of that sort which may, with least impropriety, be termed a bad one: but the act is of that sort, which, were it engaged in ever so often, could never have any evil tendency; nor indeed any other tendency than a good one. By the supposition, the motive it happened to be dictated by was that of ill-will: but the act itself is of such a nature as to have wanted nothing but sufficient discernment on your part in order to have been dictated by the most enlarged benevolence. Now, from a man's having suffered himself to be induced to gratify his resentment by means of an act of which the tendency is good, it by no means follows that he would be ready on another occasion, through the influence of the same sort of motive, to engage in any act of which the tendency is a bad one. The motive that impelled you was a dissocial one: but what social motive could there have been to restrain you? None, but what might have been outweighed by a more enlarged motive of the same kind. Now, because the dissocial motive prevailed when it stood alone, it by no means follows that it would prevail when it had a social one to combat it.

 10. Where the tendency of the act is bad, and the motive is the dissocial one of malevolence. In this case the disposition it indicates is of course a mischievous one.

The man who stole the bread from the baker, as before, did it with no other view than merely to impoverish and afflict him: accordingly, when he had got the bread, he did not eat, or sell it; but destroyed it. That the disposition, evidenced by such a transaction, is a bad one, is what every body must perceive immediately.

 Thus much with respect to the circumstances from which the mischievousness or meritoriousness of a man's disposition is to be inferred in the gross: we come now to the measure of that mischievousness or meritoriousness, as resulting from those circumstances. Now with meritorious acts and dispositions we have no direct concern in the present work. All that penal law is concerned to do, is to measure the depravity of the disposition where the act is mischievous. To this object, therefore, we shall here confine ourselves.

 It is evident, that the nature of a man's disposition must depend upon the nature of the motives he is apt to be influenced by: in other words, upon the degree of his sensibility to the force of such and such motives. For his disposition is, as it were, the sum of his intentions: the disposition he is of during a certain period, the sum or result of his intentions during that period. If, of the acts he has been intending to engage in during the supposed period, those which are apparently of a mischievous tendency, bear a large proportion to those which appear to him to be of the contrary tendency, his disposition will be of the mischievous cast: if but a small proportion, of the innocent or upright.

 Now intentions, like every thing else, are produced by the things that are their causes: and the causes of intentions are motives. If, on any occasion, a man forms either a good or a bad intention, it must be by the influence of some motive.

 When the act, which a motive prompts a man to engage in, is of a mischievous nature, it may, for distinction's sake, be termed a seducing or corrupting motive: in which case also any motive which, in opposition to the former, acts in the character of a restraining motive, may be styled a tutelary, preservatory, or preserving motive.

 Tutelary motives may again be distinguished into standing or constant, and occasional. By standing tutelary motives, I mean such as act with more or less force in all, or at least in most cases, tending to restrain a man from any mischievous acts he may be prompted to engage in; and that with a force which depends upon the general nature of the act, rather than upon any accidental circumstance with which any individual act of that sort may happen to be accompanied. By occasional tutelary motives, I mean such motives as may chance to act in this direction or not, according to the nature of the act, and of the particular occasion on which the engaging in it is brought into contemplation.

 Now it has been shown, that there is no sort of motive by which a man may not be prompted to engage in acts that are of a mischievous nature; that is, which may not come to act in the capacity of a seducing motive. It has been shown, on the other hand, that there are some motives which are remarkably less likely to operate in this way than others. It has also been shown, that the least likely of all is that of benevolence or good-will: the most common tendency of which, it has been shown, is to act in the character of a tutelary motive. It has also been shown, that even when by accident it acts in one way in the character of a seducing motive, still in another way it acts in the opposite character of a tutelary one. The motive of good-will, in as far as it respects the interests of one set of persons, may prompt a man to engage in acts which are productive of mischief to another and more extensive set: but this is only because his good-will is imperfect and confined: not taking into contemplation the interests of all the persons whose interests are at stake. The same motive, were the affection it issued from more enlarged, would operate effectually, in the character of a constraining motive, against that very act to which, by the supposition, it gives birth. This same sort of motive may therefore, without any real contradiction or deviation from truth, be ranked in the number of standing tutelary motives, notwithstanding the occasions in which it may act at the same time in the character of a seducing one.

 The same observation, nearly, may be applied to the semi-social motive of love of reputation. The force of this, like that of the former, is liable to be divided against itself. As in the case of good-will, the interests of some of the persons, who may be the objects of that sentiment, are liable to be at variance with those of others: so in the case of love of reputation, the sentiments of some of the persons, whose good opinion is desired, may be at variance with the sentiments of other persons of that number. Now in the case of an act, which is really of a mischievous nature, it can scarcely happen that there shall be no persons whatever who will look upon it with an eye of disapprobation. It can scarcely ever happen, therefore, that an act really mischievous shall not have some part at least, if not the whole, of the force of this motive to oppose it; nor, therefore, that this motive should not act with some degree of force in the character of a tutelary motive. This, therefore, may be set down as another article in the catalogue of standing tutelary motives.

 The same observation may be applied to the desire of amity, though not in altogether equal measure. For, notwithstanding the mischievousness of an act, it may happen, without much difficulty, that all the persons for whose amity a man entertains any particular present desire which is accompanied with expectation, may concur in regarding it with an eye rather of approbation than the contrary. This is but too apt to be the case among such fraternities as those of thieves, smugglers, and many other denominations of offenders. This, however, is not constantly, nor indeed most commonly the case: insomuch, that the desire of amity may still be regarded, upon the whole, as a tutelary motive, were it only from the closeness of its connexion with the love of reputation. And it may be ranked among standing tutelary motives, since, where it does apply, the force with which it acts, depends not upon the occasional circumstances of the act which it opposes, but upon principles as general as those upon which depend the action of the other semi-social motives.

 The motive of religion is not altogether in the same case with the three former. The force of it is not, like theirs, liable to be divided against itself. I mean in the civilized nations of modern times, among whom the notion of the unity of the Godhead is universal. In times of classical antiquity it was otherwise. If a man got Venus on his side, Pallas was on the other: if Æolus was for him, Neptune was against him. Æneas, with all his piety, had but a partial interest at the court of heaven. That matter stands upon a different footing now-a-days. In any given person, the force of religion, whatever it be, is now all of it on one side. It may balance, indeed, on which side it shall declare itself: and it may declare itself, as we have seen already in but too many instances, on the wrong as well as on the right. It has been, at least till lately, perhaps is still, accustomed so much to declare itself on the wrong side, and that in such material instances, that on that account it seemed not proper to place it, in point of social tendency, on a level altogether with the motive of benevolence. Where it does act, however, as it does in by far the greatest number of cases, in opposition to the ordinary seducing motives, it acts, like the motive of benevolence, in an uniform manner, not depending upon the particular circumstances that may attend the commission of the act; but tending to oppose it, merely on account of its mischievousness; and therefore, with equal force, in whatsoever circumstances it may be proposed to be committed. This, therefore, may also be added to the catalogue of standing tutelary motives.

 As to the motives which may operate occasionally in the character of tutelary motives, these, it has been already intimated, are of various sorts, and various degrees of strength in various offenses: depending not only upon the nature of the offence, but upon the accidental circumstances in which the idea of engaging in it may come in contemplation. Nor is there any sort of motive which may not come to operate in this character; as may be easily conceived. A thief, for instance, may be prevented from engaging in a projected scheme of house-breaking, by sitting too long over his bottle,
47
 by a visit from his doxy, by the occasion he may have to go elsewhere, in order to receive his dividend of a former booty;
48
 and so on.

 There are some motives, however, which seem more apt to act in this character than others; especially as things are now constituted, now that the law has every where opposed to the force of the principal seducing motives, artificial tutelary motives of its own creation. Of the motives here meant it will be necessary to take a general view. They seem to be reducible to two heads; viz. 1. The love of ease; a motive put into action by the prospect of the trouble of the attempt; that is, the trouble which it may be necessary to bestow, in overcoming the physical difficulties that may accompany it. 2. Self-preservation, as opposed to the dangers to which a man may be exposed in the prosecution of it.

 These dangers may be either, 1. Of a purely physical nature: or, 2. Dangers resulting from moral agency; in other words, from the conduct of any such persons to whom the act, if known, may be expected to prove obnoxious. But moral agency supposes knowledge with respect to the circumstances that are to have the effect of external motives in giving birth to it. Now the obtaining such knowledge, with respect to the commission of any obnoxious act, on the part of any persons who may be disposed to make the agent suffer for it, is called detection; and the agent concerning whom such knowledge is obtained, is said to be detected. The dangers, therefore, which may threaten an offender from this quarter, depend, whatever they may be, on the event of his detection; and may, therefore, be all of them comprised under the article of the danger of detection.

 The danger depending upon detection may be divided again into two branches: 1. That which may result from any opposition that may be made to the enterprise by persons on the spot; that is, at the very time the enterprise is carrying on: 2. That which respects the legal punishment, or to other suffering, that may await at a distance upon the issue of the enterprise.

 It may be worth calling to mind on this occasion, that among the tutelary motives, which have been styled constant ones, there are two of which the force depends (though not so entirely as the force of the occasional ones which have been or just mentioned, yet in a great measure) upon the circumstance of detection. These, it may be remembered, are, the love of reputation, and the desire of amity. In proportion, therefore, as the chance of being detected appears greater, these motives will apply with the greater force: with the less force, as it appears less. This is not the case with the two other standing tutelary motives, that of benevolence, and that of religion.

 We are now in a condition to determine, with some degree of precision, what is to be understood by the strength of a temptation, and what indication it may give of the degree of mischievousness in a man's disposition in the case of any offence. When a man is prompted to engage in any mischievous act, we will say, for shortness, in an offense, the strength of the temptation depends upon the ratio between the force of the seducing motives on the one hand, and such of the occasional tutelary ones, as the circumstances of the case call forth into action, on the other. The temptation, then, may be said to be strong, when the pleasure or advantage to be got from the crime is such as in the eyes of the offender must appear great in comparison of the trouble and danger that appear to him to accompany the enterprise: slight or weak, when that pleasure or advantage is such as must appear small in comparison of such trouble and such danger. It is plain the strength of the temptation depends not upon the force of the impelling (that is of the seducing) motives altogether: for let the opportunity be more favourable, that is, let the trouble, or any branch of the danger, be made less than before, it will be acknowledged, that the temptation is made so much the stronger: and on the other hand, let the opportunity become less favourable, or, in other words, let the trouble, or any branch of the danger, be made greater than before, the temptation will be so much the weaker.

Now, after taking account of such tutelary motives as have been styled occasional, the only tutelary motives that can remain are those which have been termed standing ones. But those which have been termed the standing tutelary motives, are the same that we have been styling social. It follows, therefore, that the strength of the temptation, in any case, after deducting the force of the social motives, is as the sum of the forces of the seducing, to the sum of the forces of the occasional tutelary motives.

 It remains to be inquired, what indication concerning the mischievousness or depravity of a man's disposition is afforded by the strength of the temptation, in the case where any offense happens to have been committed. It appears, then, that the weaker the temptation is, by which a man has been overcome, the more depraved and mischievous it shows his disposition to have been. For the goodness of his disposition is measured by the degree of his sensibility to the action of the social motives:
49
 in other words, by the strength of the influence which those motives have over him: now, the less considerable the force is by which their influence on him has been overcome, the more convincing is the proof that has been given of the weakness of that influence.

Again, The degree of a man's sensibility to the force of the social motives being given, it is plain that the force with which those motives tend to restrain him from engaging in any mischievous enterprise, will be as the apparent mischievousness of such enterprise, that is, as the degree of mischief with which it appears to him likely to be attended. In other words, the less mischievous the offence appears to him to be, the less averse he will be, as far as he is guided by social considerations, to engage in it; the more mischievous, the more averse. If then the nature of the offense is such as must appear to him highly mischievous, and yet he engages in it notwithstanding, it shows, that the degree of his sensibility to the force of the social motives is but slight; and consequently that his disposition is proportionably depraved. Moreover, the less the strength of the temptation was; the more pernicious and depraved does it show his disposition to have been. For the less the strength of the temptation was, the less was the force which the influence of those motives had to overcome: the clearer therefore is the proof that has been given of the weakness of that influence.

 From what has been said, it seems, that, for judging of the indication that is afforded concerning the depravity of a man's disposition by the strength of the temptation, compared with the mischievousness of the enterprise, the following rules may be laid down:

Rule 1. The strength of the temptation being given, the mischievousness of the disposition manifested by the enterprise, is as the apparent mischievousness of the act.

Thus, it would show a more depraved disposition, to murder a man for a reward of a guinea, or falsely to charge him with a robbery for the same reward, than to obtain the same sum from him by simple theft: the trouble he would have to take, and the risk he would have to run, being supposed to stand on the same footing in the one case as in the other.

Rule 2. The apparent mischievousness of the act being given, a man's disposition is the more depraved, the slighter the temptation is by which he has been overcome.

Thus, it shows a more depraved and dangerous disposition, if a man kill another out of mere sport, as the Emperor of Morocco, Muley Mahomet, is said to have done great numbers, than out of revenge, as Sylla and Marius did thousands, or in the view of self-preservation, as Augustus killed many, or even for lucre, as the same Emperor is said to have killed some. And the effects of such a depravity, on that part of the public which is apprized of it, run in the same proportion. From Augustus, some persons only had to fear, under some particular circumstances. From Muley Mahomet, every man had to fear at all times.

Rule 3. The apparent mischievousness of the act being given, the evidence which it affords of the depravity of a man's disposition is the less conclusive, the stronger the temptation is by which he has been overcome.

Thus, if a poor man, who is ready to die with hunger, steal a loaf of bread, it is a less explicit sign of depravity, than if a rich man were to commit a theft to the same amount. It will be observed, that in this rule all that is said is, that the evidence of depravity is in this case the less conclusive: it is not said that the depravity is positively the less. For in this case it is possible, for any thing that appears to the contrary, that the theft might have been committed, even had the temptation been not so strong. In this case, the alleviating circumstance is only a matter of presumption; in the former, the aggravating circumstance is a matter of certainty.

Rule 4. Where the motive is of the dissocial kind, the apparent mischievousness of the act, and the strength of the temptation, being given, the depravity is as the degree of deliberation with which it is accompanied.

For in every man, be his disposition ever so depraved, the social motives are those which, wherever the self-regarding ones stand neuter, regulate and determine the general tenor of his life. If the dissocial motives are put in action, it is only in particular circumstances, and on particular occasions; the gentle but constant force of the social motives being for a while subdued. The general and standing bias of every man's nature is, therefore, towards that side to which the force of the social motives would determine him to adhere. This being the case, the force of the social motives tends continually to put an end to that of the dissocial ones; as, in natural bodies, the force of friction tends to put an end to that which is generated by impulse. Time, then, which wears away the force of the dissocial motives, adds to that of the social. The longer, therefore, a man continues, on a given occasion, under the dominion of the dissocial motives, the more convincing is the proof that has been given of his insensibility to the force of the social ones.

Thus, it shows a worse disposition, where a man lays a deliberate plan for beating his antagonist, and beats him accordingly, than if he were to beat him upon the spot, in consequence of a sudden quarrel: and worse again, if, after having had him a long while together in his power, he beats him at intervals, and at his leisure.
50

 The depravity of disposition, indicated by an act, is a material consideration in several respects. Any mark of extraordinary depravity, by adding to the terror already inspired by the crime, and by holding up the offender as a person from whom there may be more mischief to be apprehended in future, adds in that way to the demand for punishment. By indicating a general want of sensibility on the part of the offender, it may add in another way also to the demand for punishment. The article of disposition is of the more importance, inasmuch as, in measuring out the quantum of punishment, the principle of sympathy and antipathy is apt to look at nothing else. A man who punishes because he hates, and only because he hates, such a man, when he does not find any thing odious in the disposition, is not for punishing at all; and when he does, he is not for carrying the punishment further than his hatred carries him. Hence the aversion we find so frequently expressed against the maxim, that the punishment must rise with the strength of the temptation; a maxim, the contrary of which, as we shall see, would be as cruel to offenders themselves, as it would be subversive of the purposes of punishment.

Chapter XII: OF THE CONSEQUENCES OF A MISCHIEVOUS ACT
&sect;1.
Shapes in which the mischief of an act may show itself.
 Hitherto we have been speaking of the various articles or objects on which the consequences or tendency of an act may depend: of the bare act itself: of the circumstances it may have been, or may have been supposed to be, accompanied with: of the consciousness a man may have had with respect to any such circumstances: of the intentions that may have preceded the act: of the motives that may have given birth to those intentions: and of the disposition that may have been indicated by the connexion between such intentions and such motives. We now come to speak of consequences or tendency: an article which forms the concluding link in all this chain of causes and effects, involving in it the materiality of the whole. Now, such part of this tendency as is of a mischievous nature, is all that we have any direct concern with; to that, therefore, we shall here confine ourselves.

 The tendency of an act is mischievous when the consequences of it are mischievous; that is to say, either the certain consequences or the probable. The consequences, how many and whatsoever they may be, of an act, of which the tendency is mischievous, may, such of them as are mischievous, be conceived to constitute one aggregate body, which may be termed the mischief of the act.

 This mischief may frequently be distinguished, as it were, into two shares or parcels: the one containing what may be called the primary mischief; the other, what may be called the secondary. That share may be termed the primary, which it sustained by an assignable individual, or a multitude of assignable individuals. That share may be termed the secondary, which, taking its origin from the former, extends itself either over the whole community, or over some other multitude of unassignable individuals.

 The primary mischief of an act may again be distinguished into two branches: 1. The original: and, 2. The derivative. By the original branch, I mean that which alights upon and is confined to any person who is a sufferer in the first instance, and on his own account: the person, for instance, who is beaten, robbed, or murdered. By the derivative branch, I mean any share of mischief which may befall any other assignable persons in consequence of his being a sufferer, and no otherwise. These persons must, of course, be persons who in some way or other are connected with him. Now the ways in which one person may be connected with another, have been already seen: they may be connected in the way of interest (meaning self-regarding interest) or merely in the way of sympathy. And again, persons connected with a given person, in the way of interest, may be connected with him either by affording support to him, or by deriving it from him.
51

 The secondary mischief, again, may frequently be seen to consist of two other shares or parcels: the first consisting of pain; the other of danger. The pain which it produces is a pain of apprehension: a pain grounded on the apprehension of suffering such mischiefs or inconveniences, whatever they may be, as it is the nature of the primary mischief to produce. It may be styled, in one word, the alarm. The danger is the chance, whatever it may be, which the multitude it concerns may in consequence of the primary mischief stand exposed to, of suffering such mischiefs or inconveniences. For danger is nothing but the chance of pain, or, what comes to the same thing, of loss of pleasure.

 An example may serve to make this clear. A man attacks you on the road, and robs you. You suffer a pain on the occasion of losing so much money:
52
 you also suffered a pain at the thoughts of the personal ill-treatment you apprehended he might give you, in case of your not happening to satisfy his demands.
53
 These together constitute the original branch of the primary mischief, resulting from the act of robbery. A creditor of yours, who expected you to pay him with part of that money, and a son of yours, who expected you to have given him another part, are in consequence disappointed. You are obliged to have recourse to the bounty of your father, to make good part of the deficiency. These mischiefs together make up the derivative branch. The report of this robbery circulates from hand to hand, and spreads itself in the neighbourhood. It finds its way into the newspapers, and is propagated over the whole country. Various people, on this occasion, call to mind the danger which they and their friends, as it appears from this example, stand exposed to in travelling; especially such as may have occasion to travel the same road. On this occasion they naturally feel a certain degree of pain: slighter or heavier, according to the degree of ill-treatment they may understand you to have received; the frequency of the occasion each person may have to travel in that same road, or its neighbourhood; the vicinity of each person to the spot; his personal courage; the quantity of money he may have occasion to carry about with him; and a variety of other circumstances. This constitutes the first part of the secondary mischief, resulting from the act of robbery; viz. the alarm. But people of one description or other, not only are disposed to conceive themselves to incur a chance of being robbed, in consequence of the robbery committed upon you, but (as will be shown presently) they do really incur such a chance. And it is this chance which constitutes the remaining part of the secondary mischief of the act of robbery; viz. the danger.

 Let us see what this chance amounts to; and whence it comes. How is it, for instance, that one robbery can contribute to produce another? In the first place, it is certain that it cannot create any direct motive. A motive must be the prospect of some pleasure, or other advantage, to be enjoyed in future: but the robbery in question is past: nor would it furnish any such prospect were it to come: for it is not one robbery that will furnish pleasure to him who may be about to commit another robbery. The consideration that is to operate upon a man, as a motive or inducement to commit a robbery, must be the idea of the pleasure he expects to derive from the fruits of that very robbery: but this pleasure exists independently of any other robbery.

 The means, then, by which one robbery tends, as it should seem, to produce another robbery, are two. 1. By suggesting to a person exposed to the temptation, the idea of committing such another robbery (accompanied, perhaps, with the belief of its facility). In this case the influence it exerts applies itself, in the first place, to the understanding. 2. By weakening the force of the tutelary motives which tend to restrain him from such an action, and thereby adding to the strength of the temptation.
54
 In this case the influence applies itself to the will. These forces are, 1. The motive of benevolence, which acts as a branch of the physical sanction.
55
 2. The motive of self-preservation, as against the punishment that may stand provided by the political sanction. 3. The fear of shame; a motive belonging to the moral sanction. 4. The fear of the divine displeasure; a motive belonging to the religious sanction. On the first and last of these forces it has, perhaps, no influence worth insisting on: but it has on the other two.

 The way in which a past robbery may weaken the force with which the political sanction tends to prevent a future robbery, may be thus conceived. The way in which this sanction tends to prevent a robbery, is by denouncing some particular kind of punishment against any who shall be guilty of it: the real value of which punishment will of course be diminished by the real uncertainty: as also, if there be any difference, the apparent value by the apparent uncertainty. Now this uncertainty is proportionably increased by every instance in which a man is known to commit the offense, without undergoing the punishment. This, of course, will be the case with every offense for a certain time; in short, until the punishment allotted to it takes place. If punishment takes place at last, this branch of the mischief of the offense is then at last, but not till then, put a stop to.

 The way in which a past robbery may weaken the force with which the moral sanction tends to prevent a future robbery, may be thus conceived. The way in which the moral sanction tends to prevent a robbery, is by holding forth the indignation of mankind as ready to fall upon him who shall be guilty of it. Now this indignation will be the more formidable, according to the number of those who join in it: it will be the less so, the fewer they are who join in it. But there cannot be a stronger way of showing that a man does not join in whatever indignation may be entertained against a practice, than the engaging in it himself. It shows not only that he himself feels no indignation against it, but that it seems to him there is no sufficient reason for apprehending what indignation may be felt against it by others. Accordingly, where robberies are frequent, and unpunished, robberies are committed without shame. It was thus amongst the Grecians formerly.
56
 It is thus among the Arabs still.

 In whichever way then a past offense tends to pave the way for the commission of a future offence, whether by suggesting the idea of committing it, or by adding to the strength of the temptation, in both cases it may be said to operate by the force or influence of example.

 The two branches of the secondary mischief of an act, the alarm and the danger, must not be confounded: though intimately connected, they are perfectly distinct: either may subsist without the other. The neighbourhood may be alarmed with the report of a robbery, when, in fact, no robbery either has been committed or is in a way to be committed: a neighbourhood may be on the point of being disturbed by robberies, without knowing any thing of the matter. Accordingly, we shall soon perceive, that some acts produce alarm without danger: others, danger without alarm.

 As well the danger as the alarm may again be divided, each of them, into two branches: the first, consisting of so much of the alarm or danger as may be apt to result from the future behaviour of the same agent: the second, consisting of so much as may be apt to result from the behaviour of other persons: such others, to wit, as may come to engage in acts of the same sort and tendency.
57

 The distinction between the primary and the secondary consequences of an act must be carefully attended to. It is so just, that the latter may often be of a directly opposite nature to be the former. In some cases, where the primary consequences of the act are attended with a mischief, the secondary consequences be may be beneficial, and that to such a degree, as even greatly to outweigh the mischief of the primary. This is the case, for instance, with all acts of punishment, when properly applied. Of these, the primary mischief being never intended to fall but upon such persons as may happen to have committed some act which it is expedient to prevent, the secondary mischief, that is, the alarm and the danger, extends no farther than to such persons as are under temptation to commit it: in which case, in as far as it tends to restrain them from committing such acts, it is of a beneficial nature.

 Thus much with regard to acts that produce positive pain, and that immediately. This case, by reason of its simplicity, seemed the fittest to take the lead. But acts may produce mischief in various other ways; which, together with those already specified, may all be comprised by the following abridged analysis.

Mischief may admit of a division in any one of three points of view. 1. According to its own nature. 2. According to its cause. 3. According to the person, or other party, who is the object of it.
58
 With regard to its nature, it may be either simple or complex:
59
 when simple, it may either be positive or negative: positive, consisting of actual pain: negative, consisting of the loss of pleasure. Whether simple or complex, and whether positive or negative, it may be either certain or contingent. When it is negative, it consists of the loss of some benefit or advantage: this benefit may be material in both or either of two ways: 1. By affording actual pleasure: or, 2. By averting pain or danger, which is the chance of pain: that is, by affording security. In as far, then, as the benefit which a mischief tends to avert, is productive of security, the tendency of such mischief is to produce insecurity. 2. With regard to its cause, mischief may be produced either by one single action, or not without the concurrence of other actions: if not without the concurrence of other actions, these others may be the actions either of the same person, or of other persons: in either case, they may be either acts of the same kind as that in question, or of other kinds. 3. Lastly, with regard to the party who is the object of the mischief, or, in other words, who is in a way to be affected by it, such party may be either an assignable
60
 individual, or assemblage of individuals, or else a multitude of unassignable individuals. When the object is an assignable individual, this individual may either be the person himself who is the author of the mischief, or some other person. When the individuals who are the objects of it, are an unassignable multitude, this multitude may be either the whole political community or state, or some subordinate division of it. Now when the object of the mischief is the author himself, it may be styled self-regarding: when any other party is the object, extra-regarding: when such other party is an individual, it may be styled private: when a subordinate branch of the community, semi-public: when the whole community, public. Here, for the present, we must stop. To pursue the subject through its inferior distinctions, will be the business of the chapter which exhibits the division of offenses.
61

The cases which have been already illustrated, are those in which the primary mischief is not necessarily otherwise than a simple one, and that positive: present, and therefore certain: producible by a single action, without any necessity of the concurrence of any other action, either on the part of the same agent, or of others; and having for its object an assignable individual, or, by accident an assemblage of assignable individuals: extra-regarding therefore, and private. This primary mischief is accompanied by a secondary: the first branch of which is sometimes contingent and sometimes certain, the other never otherwise than contingent: both extra-regarding and semi-public: in other respects, pretty much upon a par with the primary mischief: except that the first branch, viz. the alarm, though inferior in magnitude to the primary, is, in point of extent, and therefore, upon the whole, in point of magnitude, much superior.

 Two instances more will be sufficient to illustrate the most material of the modifications above exhibited.

A man drinks a certain quantity of liquor, and intoxicates himself. The intoxication in this particular instance does him no sort of harm: or, what comes to the same thing, none that is perceptible. But it is probable, and indeed next to certain, that a given number of acts of the same kind would do him a very considerable degree of harm: more or less according to his constitution and other circumstances: for this is no more than what experience manifests every day. It is also certain, that one act of this sort, by one means or other, tends considerably to increase the disposition a man may be in to practise other acts of the same sort: for this also is verified by experience. This, therefore, is one instance where the mischief producible by the act is contingent? in other words, in which the tendency of the act is no otherwise mischievous than in virtue of its producing a chance of mischief. This chance depends upon the concurrence of other acts of the same kind; and those such as must be practiced by the same person. The object of the mischief is that very person himself who is the author of it, and he only, unless by accident. The mischief is therefore private and self-regarding.

As to its secondary mischief, alarm, it produces none: it produces indeed a certain quantity of danger by the influence of example: but it is not often that this danger will amount to a quantity worth regarding.

 Again. A man omits paying his share to a public tax. This we see is an act of the negative kind.
62
 Is this then to be placed upon the list of mischievous acts? Yes, certainly. Upon what grounds? Upon the following. To defend the community against its external as well as its internal adversaries are tasks, not to mention others of a less indispensable nature which cannot be fulfilled but at a considerable expense. But whence is the money for defraying this expense to come? It can be obtained in no other manner than by contributions to be collected from individuals; in a word, by taxes. The produce then of these taxes is to be looked upon as a kind of benefit which it is necessary the governing part of the community should receive for the use of the whole. This produce, before it can be applied to its destination, requires that there should be certain persons commissioned to receive and to apply it. Now if these persons, had they received it, would have applied it to its proper destination, it would have been a benefit: the not putting them in a way to receive it, is then a mischief. But it is possible, that if received, it might not have been applied to its proper destination; or that the services, in consideration of which it was bestowed, might not have been performed. It is possible, that the under-officer, who collected the produce of the tax, might not have paid it over to his principal: it is possible that the principal might not have forwarded it on according to its farther destination; to the judge, for instance, who is to protect the community against its clandestine enemies from within, or the soldier, who is to protect it against its open enemies from without: it is possible that the judge, or the soldier, had they received it, would not however have been induced by it to fulfil their respective duties: it is possible, that the judge would not have sat for the punishment of criminals, and the decision of controversies: it is possible that the soldier would not have drawn his sword in the defense of the community. These, together with an infinity of other intermediate acts, which for the sake of brevity I pass over, form a connected chain of duties, the discharge of which is necessary to the preservation of the community. They must every one of them be discharged, ere the benefit to which they are contributory can be produced. If they are all discharged, in that case the benefit subsists, and any act, by tending to intercept that benefit, may produce a mischief. But if any of them are not, the benefit fails: it fails of itself: it would not have subsisted, although the act in question (the act of non-payment) had not been committed. The benefit is therefore contingent; and, accordingly, upon a certain supposition, the act which consists in the averting of it is not a mischievous one. But this supposition, in any tolerably-ordered government, will rarely indeed be verified. In the very worst-ordered government that exists, the greatest part of the duties that are levied are paid over according to their destination: and, with regard to any particular sum, that is attempted to be levied upon any particular person upon any particular occasion, it is therefore manifest, that, unless it be certain that it will not be so disposed of, the act of withholding it is a mischievous one.

The act of payment, when referable to any particular sum, especially if it be a small one, might also have failed of proving beneficial on another ground: and, consequently, the act of nonpayment, of proving mischievous. It is possible that the same services, precisely, might have been rendered without the money as with it. If, then, speaking of any small limited sum, such as the greatest which any one person is called upon to pay at a time, a man were to say, that the non-payment of it would be attended with mischievous consequences; this would be far from certain: but what comes to the same thing as if it were, it is perfectly certain when applied to the whole. It is certain, that if all of a sudden the payment of all taxes was to cease, there would no longer be anything effectual done, either for the maintenance of justice, or for the defence of the community against its foreign adversaries: that therefore the weak would presently be oppressed and injured in all manner of ways, by the strong at home, and both together overwhelmed by oppressors abroad. Upon the whole, therefore, it is manifest, that in this case, though the mischief is remote and contingent, though in its first appearance it consists of nothing more than the interception of a benefit, and though the individuals, in whose favour that benefit would have been reduced into the explicit form of pleasure or security, are altogether unassignable, yet the mischievous tendency of the act is not on all these accounts the less indisputable. The mischief, in point of intensity and duration, is indeed unknown: it is uncertain: it is remote. But in point of extent it is immense; and in point of fecundity, pregnant to a degree that baffles calculation.

 It may now be time to observe, that it is only in the case where the mischief is extra-regarding, and has an assignable person or persons for its object, that so much of the secondary branch of it as consists in alarm can have place. When the individuals it affects are uncertain, and altogether out of sight, no alarm can be produced: as there is nobody whose sufferings you can see, there is nobody whose sufferings you can be alarmed at. No alarm, for instance, is produced by nonpayment to a tax. If at any distant and uncertain period of time such offence should chance to be productive of any kind of alarm, it would appear to proceed, as indeed immediately it would proceed, from a very different cause. It might be immediately referable, for example, to the act of a legislator, who should deem it necessary to lay on a new tax, in order to make up for the deficiency occasioned in the produce of the old one. Or it might be referable to the act of an enemy, who, under favour of a deficiency thus created in the fund allotted for defense, might invade the country, and exact from it much heavier contributions than those which had been thus withholden from the sovereign.
63

As to any alarm which such an offence might raise among the few who might chance to regard the matter with the eyes of statesmen, it is of too slight and uncertain a nature to be worth taking into the account.

&sect; 2.
How Intentionality, &c. may influence the mischief of an act.
 We have seen the nature of the secondary mischief, which is apt to be reflected, as it were, from the primary, in the cases where the individuals who are the objects of the mischief are assignable. It is now time to examine into the circumstances upon which the production of such secondary mischief depends. These circumstances are no others than the four articles which have formed the subjects of the four last preceding chapters: viz. 1. The intentionality, 2. The consciousness. 3. The motive. 4. The disposition. It is to be observed all along, that it is only the danger that is immediately governed by the real state of the mind in respect to those articles: it is by the apparent state of it that the alarm is governed. It is governed by the real only in as far as the apparent happens, as in most cases it may be expected to do, to quadrate with the real. The different influences of the articles of intentionality and consciousness may be represented in the several cases following.

 Case 1. Where the act is so completely unintentional, as to be altogether involuntary. In this case it is attended with no secondary mischief at all.

A bricklayer is at work upon a house: a passenger is walking in the street below. A fellow-workman comes and gives the bricklayer a violent push, in consequence of which he falls upon the passenger, and hurts him. It is plain there is nothing in this event that can give other people, who may happen to be in the street, the least reason to apprehend any thing in future on the part of the man who fell, whatever there may be with regard to the man who pushed him.

 Case 2. Where the act, though not unintentional, is unadvised, insomuch that the mischievous part of the consequences is unintentional, but the unadvisedness is attended with heedlessness. In this case the act is attended with some small degree of secondary mischief, in proportion to the degree of heedlessness.

A groom being on horseback, and riding through a frequented street, turns a corner at a full pace, and rides over a passenger, who happens to be going by. It is plain, by this behaviour of the groom, some degree of alarm may be produced, less or greater, according to the degree of heedlessness betrayed by him: according to the quickness of his pace, the fullness of the street, and so forth. He has done mischief, it may be said, by his carelessness, already: who knows but that on other occasions the like cause may produce the like effect?

 Case 3. Where the act is misadvised with respect to a circumstance, which, had it existed, would fully have excluded or (what comes to the same thing) outweighed the primary mischief: and there is no rashness in the case. In this case the act is attended with no secondary mischief at all.

It is needless to multiply examples any farther.

 Case 4. Where the act is misadvised with respect to a circumstance which would have excluded or counterbalanced the primary mischief in part, but not entirely: and still there is no rashness. In this case the act is attended with some degree of secondary mischief, in proportion to that part of the primary which remains unexcluded or uncounterbalanced.

 Case 5. Where the act is misadvised with respect to a circumstance, which, had it existed, would have excluded or counterbalanced the primary mischief entirely, or in part: and there is a degree of rashness in the supposal. In this case, the act is also attended with a farther degree of secondary mischief, in proportion to the degree of rashness.

 Case 6. Where the consequences are completely intentional, and there is no missupposal in the case. In this case the secondary mischief is at the highest.

 Thus much with regard to intentionality and consciousness. We now come to consider in what manner the secondary mischief is affected by the nature of the motive.

Where an act is pernicious in its primary consequences, the secondary mischief is not obliterated by the goodness of the motive; though the motive be of the best kind. For, notwithstanding the goodness of the motive, an act of which the primary consequences are pernicious, is produced by it in the instance in question, by the supposition. It may, therefore, in other instances: although this is not so likely to happen from a good motive as from a bad one.
64

 An act, which, though pernicious in its primary consequences, is rendered in other respects beneficial upon the whole, by virtue of its secondary consequences, is not changed back again, and rendered pernicious upon the whole by the badness of the motive: although the motive be of the worst kind.
65

 But when not only the primary consequences of an act are pernicious, but, in other respects, the secondary likewise, the secondary mischief may be aggravated by the nature of the motive: so much of that mischief, to wit, as respects the future behaviour of the same person.

 It is not from the worst kind of motive, however, that the secondary mischief of an act receives its greatest aggravation.

 The aggravation which the secondary mischief of an act, in as far as it respects the future behaviour of the same person, receives from the nature of a motive in an individual case, is as the tendency of the motive to produce, on the part of the same person, acts of the like bad tendency with that of the act in question.

 The tendency of a motive to produce acts of the like kind, on the part of any given person, is as the strength and constancy of its influence on that person, as applied to the production of such effects.

 The tendency of a species of motive to give birth to acts of any kind, among persons in general, is as the strength, constancy, and extensiveness
66
 of its influence, as applied to the production of such effects.

 Now the motives, whereof the influence is at once most powerful, most constant, and most extensive, are the motives of physical desire, the love of wealth, the love of ease, the love of life, and the fear of pain: all of them self-regarding motives. The motive of displeasure, whatever it may be in point of strength and extensiveness, is not near so constant in its influence (the case of mere antipathy excepted) as any of the other three. A pernicious act, therefore, when committed through vengeance, or otherwise through displeasure, is not near so mischievous as the same pernicious act, when committed by force of any one of those other motives.
67

 As to the motive of religion, whatever it may sometimes prove to be in point of strength and constancy, it is not in point of extent so universal, especially in its application to acts of a mischievous nature, as any of the three preceding motives. It may, however, be as universal in a particular state, or in a particular district of a particular state. It is liable indeed to be very irregular in its operations. It is apt, however, to be frequently as powerful as the motive of vengeance, or indeed any other motive whatsoever. It will sometimes even be more powerful than any other motive. It is, at any rate, much more constant.
68
 A pernicious act, therefore, when committed through the motive of religion, is more mischievous than when committed through the motive of ill-will.

 Lastly, The secondary mischief, to wit, so much of it as hath respect to the future behaviour of the same person, is aggravated or lessened by the apparent depravity or beneficence of his disposition: and that in the proportion of such apparent depravity or beneficence.

 The consequences we have hitherto been speaking of, are the natural consequences, of which the act, and the other articles we have been considering, are the causes: consequences that result from the behaviour of the individual, who is the offending agent, without the interference of political authority. We now come to speak of punishment: which, in the sense in which it is here considered, is an artificial consequence, annexed by political authority to an offensive act, in one instance, in the view of putting a stop to the production of events similar to the obnoxious part of its natural consequences, in other instances.

Chapter XIII: CASES UNMEET FOR PUNISHMENT
&sect; 1.
General view of cases unmeet for punishment.
 The general object which all laws have, or ought to have, in common, is to augment the total happiness of the community; and therefore, in the first place, to exclude, as far as may be, every thing that tends to subtract from that happiness: in other words, to exclude mischief.

 But all punishment is mischief: all punishment in itself is evil. Upon the principle of utility, if it ought at all to be admitted, it ought only to be admitted in as far as it promises to exclude some greater evil.
69

 It is plain, therefore, that in the following cases punishment ought not to be inflicted.

1. Where it is groundless: where there is no mischief for it to prevent; the act not being mischievous upon the whole.
2. Where it must be inefficacious: where it cannot act so as to prevent the mischief.
3. Where it is unprofitable, or too expensive: where the mischief it would produce would be greater than what it prevented.
4. Where it is needless: where the mischief may be prevented, or cease of itself, without it: that is, at a cheaper rate.
&sect; 2.
Cases in which punishment is groundless.
These are,

  Where there has never been any mischief: where no mischief has been produced to any body by the act in question. Of this number are those in which the act was such as might, on a some occasions, be mischievous or disagreeable, but the person whose interest it concerns gave his consent to the performance of it. This consent, provided it be free, and fairly obtained,
70
 is the best proof that can be produced, that, to the person who gives it, no mischief, at least no immediate mischief, upon the whole, is done. For no man can be so good a judge as the man himself, what it is gives him pleasure or displeasure.

 2. Where the mischief was outweighed: although a mischief was produced by that act, yet the same act was necessary to the production of a benefit which was of greater value
71
 than the mischief. This may be the case with any thing that is done in the way of precaution against instant calamity, as also with any thing that is done in the exercise of the several sorts of powers necessary to be established in every community, to wit, domestic, judicial, military, and supreme.
72

 3. Where there is a certainty of an adequate compensation: and that in all cases where the offense can be committed. This supposes two things: 1. That the offence is such as admits of an adequate compensation: 2. That such a compensation is sure to be forthcoming. Of these suppositions, the latter will be found to be a merely ideal one: a supposition that cannot, in the universality here given to it, be verified by fact. It cannot, therefore, in practice, be numbered amongst the grounds of absolute impunity. It may, however, be admitted as a ground for an abatement of that punishment, which other considerations, standing by themselves, would seem to dictate.
73

&sect; 3.
Cases in which punishment must be inefficacious
These are,

 1. Where the penal provision is not established until after the act is done. Such are the cases, 1. Of an ex-post-facto law; where the legislator himself appoints not a punishment till after the act is done. 2. Of a sentence beyond the law; where the judge, of his own authority, appoints a punishment which the legislator had not appointed.

 2. Where the penal provision, though established, is not conveyed to the notice of the person on whom it seems intended that it should operate. Such is the case where the law has omitted to employ any of the expedients which are necessary, to make sure that every person whatsoever, who is within the reach of the law, be apprised of all the cases whatsoever, in which (being in the station of life he is in) he can be subjected to the penalties of the law.
74

 3. Where the penal provision, though it were conveyed to a man's notice, could produce no effect on him, with respect to the preventing him from engaging in any act of the sort in question. Such is the case, 1. In extreme infancy; where a man has not yet attained that state or disposition of mind in which the prospect of evils so distant as those which are held forth by the law, has the effect of influencing his conduct. 2. In insanity; where the person, if he has attained to that disposition, has since been deprived of it through the influence of some permanent though unseen cause. 3. In intoxication; where he has been a deprived of it by the transient influence of a visible cause: such as the use of wine, or opium, or other drugs, that act in this manner on the nervous system: which condition is indeed neither more nor less than a temporary insanity produced by an assignable cause.
75

 4. Where the penal provision (although, being conveyed to the party's notice, it might very well prevent his engaging in acts of the sort in question, provided he knew that it related to those acts) could not have this effect, with regard to the individual act he is about to engage in: to wit, because he knows not that it is of the number of those to which the penal provision relates. This may happen, 1. In the case of unintentionality; where he intends not to engage, and thereby knows not that he is about to engage, in the act in which eventually he is about to engage.
76
 2. In the case of unconsciousness; where, although he may know that he is about to engage in the act itself, yet, from not knowing all the material circumstances attending it, he knows not of the tendency it has to produce that mischief, in contemplation of which it has been made penal in most instances. 3. In the case of missupposal; where, although he may know of the tendency the act has to produce that degree of mischief, he supposes it, though mistakenly, to be attended with some circumstance, or set of circumstances, which, if it had been attended with, it would either not have been productive of that mischief, or have been productive of such a greater degree of good, as has determined the legislator in such a case not to make it penal.
77

 5. Where, though the penal clause might exercise a full and prevailing influence, were it to act alone, yet by the predominant influence of some opposite cause upon the will, it must necessarily be ineffectual; because the evil which he sets himself about to undergo, in the case of his not engaging in the act, is so great, that the evil denounced by the penal clause, in case of his engaging in it, cannot appear greater. This may happen, 1. In the case of physical danger; where the evil is such as appears likely to be brought about by the unassisted powers of nature. 2. In the case of a threatened mischief; where it is such as appears likely to be brought about through the intentional and conscious agency of man.
78

 6. Where (though the penal clause may exert a full and prevailing influence over the will of the party) yet his physical faculties (owing to the predominant influence of some physical cause) are not in a condition to follow the determination of the will: insomuch that the act is absolutely involuntary. Such is the case of physical compulsion or restraint, by whatever means brought about; where the man's hand, for instance, is pushed against some object which his will disposes him not to touch; or tied down from touching some object which his will disposes him to touch.

&sect; 3.
Cases where punishment is unprofitable.
These are,

 1. Where, on the one hand, the nature of the offense, on the other hand, that of the punishment, are, in the ordinary state of things, such, that when compared together, the evil of the latter will turn out to be greater than that of the former.

 Now the evil of the punishment divides itself into four branches, by which so many different sets of persons are affected. 1. The evil of coercion or restraint: or the pain which it gives a man not to be able to do the act, whatever it be, which by the apprehension of the punishment he is deterred from doing. This is felt by those by whom the law is observed. 2. The evil of apprehension: or the pain which a man, who has exposed himself to punishment, feels at the thoughts of undergoing it. This is felt by those by whom the law has been broken, and who feel themselves in danger of its being executed upon them. 3. The evil of sufferance:
79
 or the pain which a man feels, in virtue of the punishment itself, from the time when he begins to undergo it. This is felt by those by whom the law is broken, and upon whom it comes actually to be executed. 4. The pain of sympathy, and the other derivative evils resulting to the persons who are in connection with the several classes of original sufferers just mentioned.
80
 Now of these four lots of evil, the first will be greater or less, according to the nature of the act from which the party is restrained: the second and third according to the nature of the punishment which stands annexed to that offence.

 On the other hand, as to the evil of the offense, this will also, of course, be greater or less, according to the nature of each offense. The proportion between the one evil and the other will therefore be different in the case of each particular offence. The cases, therefore, where punishment is unprofitable on this ground, can by no other means be discovered, than by an examination of each particular offense; which is what will be the business of the body of the work.

 2. Where, although in the ordinary state of things, the evil resulting from the punishment is not greater than the benefit which is likely to result from the force with which it operates, during the same space of time, towards the excluding the evil of the offenses, yet it may have been rendered so by the influence of some occasional circumstances. In the number of these circumstances may be, 1. The multitude of delinquents at a particular juncture; being such as would increase, beyond the ordinary measure, the quantum of the second and third lots, and thereby also of a part of the fourth lot, in the evil of the punishment. 2. The extraordinary value of the services of some one delinquent; in the case where the effect of the punishment would be to deprive the community of the benefit of those services. 3. The displeasure of the people; that is, of an indefinite number of the members of the same community, in cases where (owing to of the influence of some occasional incident) they happen to conceive, that the offense or the offender ought not to be punished at all, or at least ought not to be punished in the way in question. 4. The displeasure of foreign powers; that is, of the governing body, or a considerable number of the members of some foreign community or communities, with which the community in question is connected.

&sect; 3.
Cases where punishment is needless.
These are,

 1. Where the purpose of putting an end to the practice may be attained as effectually at a cheaper rate: by instruction, is for instance, as well as by terror: by informing the understanding, as well as by exercising an immediate influence on the will. This seems to be the case with respect to all those offenses which consist in the disseminating pernicious principles in matters of duty; of whatever kind the duty be; whether political, or moral, or religious. And this, whether such principles be disseminated under, or even without; a sincere persuasion of their being beneficial. I say, even without: for though in such a case it is not instruction that can prevent the writer from endeavouring to inculcate his principles, yet it may the readers from adopting them: without which, his endeavouring to inculcate them will do no harm. In such a case, the sovereign will commonly have little need to take an active part: if it be the interest of one individual to inculcate principles that are pernicious, it will as surely be the interest of other individuals to expose them. But if the sovereign must needs take a part in the controversy, the pen is the proper weapon to combat error with, not the sword.

Chapter XIV: OF THE PROPORTION BETWEEN PUNISHMENTS AND OFFENCES
 We have seen that the general object of all laws is to prevent mischief; that is to say, when it is worth while; but that, where there are no other means of doing this than punishment, there are four cases in which it is not worth while.

 When it is worth while, there are four subordinate designs or objects, which, in the course of his endeavours to compass, as far as may be, that one general object, a legislator, whose views are governed by the principle of utility, comes naturally to propose to himself.

 1. His first, most extensive, and most eligible object, is to prevent, in as far as it is possible, and worth while, all sorts of offenses whatsoever:
81
 in other words, so to manage, that no offense whatsoever may be committed.

 2. But if a man must needs commit an offense of some kind or other, the next object is to induce him to commit an offense less mischievous, rather than one more mischievous: in other words, to choose always the least mischievous, of two offenses that will either of them suit his purpose.

 3. When a man has resolved upon a particular offense, the next object is to dispose him to do no more mischief than is necessary to his purpose: in other words, to do as little mischief as is consistent with the benefit he has in view.

 4. The last object is, whatever the mischief be, which it is proposed to prevent, to prevent it at as cheap a rate as possible.

 Subservient to these four objects, or purposes, must be the rules or canons by which the proportion of punishments
82
 to offenses is to be governed.

 Rule 1. The first object, it has been seen, is to prevent, in as far as it is worth while, all sorts of offenses; therefore,

The value of the punishment must not less in any case than what is sufficient to outweigh that of the profit
83
 of the offense.
84

If it be, the offence (unless some other considerations, independent of the punishment should intervene and operate efficaciously in the character of tutelary motives
85
) will be sure to be to committed notwithstanding:
86
 the whole lot of punishment will be thrown away: it will be altogether inefficacious.
87

 The above rule has been often objected to, on account of its seeming harshness: but this can only have happened for want of its being properly understood. The strength of the temptation, cæteris paribus, is as the profit of the offense: the quantum of the punishment must rise with the profit of the offense: cæteris paribus, it must therefore rise with the strength of the temptation. This there is no disputing. True it is, that the stronger the temptation, the less conclusive is the indication which the act of delinquency affords of the depravity of the offender's disposition.
88
 So far then as the absence of any aggravation, arising from extraordinary depravity of disposition, may operate, or at the utmost, so far as the presence of a ground of extenuation, resulting from the innocence or beneficence of the offender's disposition, can operate, the strength of the temptation may operate in abatement of the demand for punishment. But it can never operate so far as to indicate the propriety of making the punishment ineffectual, which it is sure to be when brought below the level of the apparent profit of the offense.

The partial benevolence which should prevail for the reduction of it below this level, would counteract as well those purposes which such a motive would actually have in view, as those more extensive purposes which benevolence ought to have in view: it would be cruelty not only to the public, but to the very persons in whose behalf it pleads: in its effects, I mean, however opposite in its intention. Cruelty to the public, that is cruelty to the innocent, by suffering them, for want of an adequate protection, to lie exposed to the mischief of the offense: cruelty even to the offender himself, by punishing him to no purpose, and without the chance of compassing that beneficial end, by which alone the introduction of the evil of punishment is to be justified.

 Rule 2. But whether a given offence shall be prevented in a given degree by a given quantity of punishment, is never any thing better than a chance; for the purchasing of which, whatever punishment is employed, is so much expended into advance. However, for the sake of giving it the better chance of outweighing the profit of the offence,

The greater the mischief of the offense, the greater is the expense which it may be worth while to be at, in the way of punishment.
89

 Rule 3. The next object is, to induce a man to choose always the least mischievous of two offenses; therefore,

Where two offences come in competition, the punishment for the greater offence must be sufficient to induce a man to prefer the less.
90

 Rule 4. When a man has resolved upon a particular offense, the next object is, to induce him to do no more mischief than what is necessary for his purpose: therefore

The punishment should be adjusted in such manner to each particular offence, that for every part of the mischief there may be a motive to restrain the offender from giving birth to it.
91

 Rule 5. The last object is, whatever mischief is guarded against, to guard against it at as cheap a rate as possible: therefore

The punishment ought in no case to be more than what is necessary to bring it into conformity with the rules here given.

 Rule 6. It is further to be observed, that owing to the different manners and degrees in which persons under different circumstances are affected by the same exciting cause, a punishment which is the same in name will not always either really produce, or even so much as appear to others to produce, in two different persons the same degree of pain: therefore

That the quantity actually indicted on each individual offender may correspond to the quantity intended for similar offenders in general, the several circumstances influencing sensibility ought always to be taken into account.
92

 Of the above rules of proportion, the first four, we may perceive, serve to mark out limits on the side of diminution; the limits below which a punishment ought not to be diminished: the fifth the limits on the side of increase; the limits above which it ought not to be increased. The five first are calculated to serve as guides to the legislator: the sixth is calculated in some measure, indeed, to the same purpose; but principally for guiding the judge in his endeavors to conform, on both sides, to the intentions of the legislator.

 Let us look back a little. The first rule, in order to render it more conveniently applicable to practice, may need perhaps to be a little more particularly unfolded. It is to be observed, then, that for the sake of accuracy, it was necessary, instead of the word quantity to make use of the less perspicuous term value. For the word quantity will not properly include the circumstances either of certainty or proximity: circumstances which, in estimating the value of a lot of pain or pleasure, must always be taken into the account.
93
 Now, on the one hand, a lot of punishment is a lot of pain; on the other hand, the profit of an offense is a lot of pleasure, or what is equivalent to it. But the profit of the offense is commonly more certain than the punishment, or, what comes to the same thing, appears so at least to the offender. It is at any rate commonly more immediate. It follows, therefore, that, in order to maintain its superiority over the profit of the offense, the punishment must have its value made up in some other way, in proportion to that whereby it falls short in the two points of certainty and proximity. Now there is no other way in which it can receive any addition to its value, but by receiving an addition in point of magnitude. Wherever then the value of the punishment falls short, either in point of certainty, or of proximity, of that of the profit of the offence, it must receive a proportionable addition in point of magnitude.
94

 Yet farther. To make sure of giving the value of the punishment the superiority over that of the offence, it may be necessary, in some cases, to take into account the profit not only of the individual offence to which the punishment is to be annexed, but also of such other offences of the same sort as the offender is likely to have already committed without detection. This random mode of calculation, severe as it is, it will be impossible to avoid having recourse to, in certain cases: in such, to wit, in which the profit is pecuniary, the chance of detection very small, and the obnoxious act of such a nature as indicates a habit: for example, in the case of frauds against the coin. If it be not recurred to, the practice of committing the offence will be sure to be, upon the balance of the account, a gainful practice. That being the case, the legislator will be absolutely sure of not being able to suppress it, and the whole punishment that is bestowed upon it will be thrown away. In a word (to keep to the same expressions we set out with) that whole quantity of punishment will be inefficacious.

 Rule 7. These things being considered, the three following rules may be laid down by way of supplement and explanation to Rule 1.

To enable the value of the punishment to outweigh that of the profit of the offense, it must be increased, in point of magnitude, in proportion as it falls short in point of certainty.

 Rule 8. Punishment must be further increased in point of magnitude, in proportion as it falls short in point of proximity.

 Rule 9. Where the act is conclusively indicative of a habit, such an increase must be given to the punishment as may enable it to outweigh the profit not only of the individual offence, but of such other like offenses as are likely to have been committed with impunity by the same offender.

 There may be a few other circumstances or considerations which may influence, in some small degree, the demand for punishment: but as the propriety of these is either not so demonstrable, or not so constant, or the application of them not so determinate, as that of the foregoing, it may be doubted whether they be worth putting on a level with the others.

 Rule 10. When a punishment, which in point of quality is particularly well calculated to answer its intention, cannot exist in less than a certain quantity, it may sometimes be of use, for the sake of employing it, to stretch a little beyond that quantity which, on other accounts, would be strictly necessary.

 Rule 11. In particular, this may sometimes be the case, where the punishment proposed is of such a nature as to be particularly well calculated to answer the purpose of a moral lesson.
95

 Rule 12. The tendency of the above considerations is to dictate an augmentation in the punishment: the following rule operates in the way of diminution. There are certain cases (it has been seen
96
) in which, by the influence of accidental circumstances, punishment may be rendered unprofitable in the whole: in the same cases it may chance to be rendered unprofitable as to a part only. Accordingly,

In adjusting the quantum of punishment, the circumstances, by which all punishment may be rendered unprofitable, ought to be attended to.

 Rule 13. It is to be observed, that the more various and minute any set of provisions are, the greater the chance is that any given article in them will not be borne in mind: without which, no benefit can ensue from it. Distinctions, which are more complex than what the conceptions of those whose conduct it is designed to influence can take in, will even be worse than useless. The whole system will present a confused appearance: and thus the effect, not only of the proportions established by the articles in question, but of whatever is connected with them, will be destroyed.
97
 To draw a precise line of direction in such case seems impossible. However, by way of memento, it may be of some use to subjoin the following rule.

Among provisions designed to perfect the proportion between punishments and offences, if any occur, which, by their own particular good effects, would not make up for the harm they would do by adding to the intricacy of the Code, they should be omitted.
98

 It may be remembered, that the political sanction, being that to which the sort of punishment belongs, which in this chapter is all along in view, is but one of four sanctions, which may all of them contribute their share towards producing the same effects. It may be expected, therefore, that in adjusting the quantity of political punishment, allowance should be made for the assistance it may meet with from those other controlling powers. True it is, that from each of these several sources a very powerful assistance may sometimes be derived. But the case is, that (setting aside the moral sanction, in the case where the force of it is expressly adopted into and modified by the political
99
) the force of those other powers is never determinate enough to be depended upon. It can never be reduced, like political punishment, into exact lots, nor meted out in number, quantity, and value. The legislator is therefore obliged to provide the full complement of punishment, as if he were sure of not receiving any assistance whatever from any of those quarters. If he does, so much the better: but lest he should not, it is necessary he should, at all events, make that provision which depends upon himself.

 It may be of use, in this place, to recapitulate the several circumstances, which, in establishing the proportion betwixt punishments and offenses, are to be attended to. These seem to be as follows:

 On the part of the offence:

1. The profit of the offense;
2. The mischief of the offense;
3. The profit and mischief of other greater or lesser offences, of different sorts, which the offender may have to choose out of;
4. The profit and mischief of other offenses, of the same sort, which the same offender may probably have been guilty of already.
 On the part of the punishment:

5. The magnitude of the punishment: composed of its intensity and duration;
6. The deficiency of the punishment in point of certainty;
7. The deficiency of the punishment in point of proximity;
8. The quality of the punishment;
9. The accidental advantage in point of quality of a punishment, not strictly needed in point of quantity;
10. The use of a punishment of a particular quality, in the character of a moral lesson.
 On the part of the offender:

11. The responsibility of the class of persons in a way to offend;
12. The sensibility of each particular offender;
13. The particular merits or useful qualities of any particular offender, in case of a punishment which might deprive the community of the benefit of them;
14. The multitude of offenders on any particular occasion.
 On the part of the public, at any particular conjuncture:

15. The inclinations of the people, for or against any quantity or mode of punishment;
16. The inclinations of foreign powers.
 On the part of the law: that is, of the public for a continuance:

17. The necessity of making small sacrifices, in point of proportionality, for the sake of simplicity.
 There are some, perhaps, who, at first sight, may look upon the nicety employed in the adjustment of such rules, as so much labour lost: for gross ignorance, they will say, never, troubles itself about laws, and passion does not calculate. But, the evil of ignorance admits of cure:
100
 and as to the proposition that passion does not calculate, this, like most of these very general and oracular propositions, is not true. When matters of such importance as pain and pleasure are at stake, and these in the highest degree (the only matters, in short, that can be of importance) who is there that does not calculate? Men calculate, some with less exactness, indeed, some with more: but all men calculate. I would not say, that even a madman does not calculate.
101
 Passion calculates, more or less, in every man: in different men, according to the warmth or coolness of their dispositions: according to the firmness or irritability of their minds: according to the nature of the motives by which they are acted upon. Happily, of all passions, that is the most given to calculation, from the excesses of which, by reason of its strength, constancy, and universality, society has most to apprehend:
102
 I mean that which corresponds to the motive of pecuniary interest: so that these niceties, if such they are to be called, have the best chance of being efficacious, where efficacy is of the most importance.

Chapter XV: OF THE PROPERTIES TO BE GIVEN TO A LOT OF PUNISHMENT
 It has been shown what the rules are, which ought to be observed in adjusting the proportion between the punishments and the offense. The properties to be given to a lot of punishment, in every instance, will of course be such as it stands in need of, in order to be capable of being applied, in conformity to those rules: the quality will be regulated by the quantity.

 The first of those rules, we may remember, was, that the quantity of punishment must not be less, in any case, than what is sufficient to outweigh the profit of the offence: since, as often as it is less, the whole lot (unless by accident the deficiency should be supplied from some of the other sanctions) is thrown away: it is inefficacious. The fifth was, that the punishment ought in no case to be more than what is required by the several other rules: since, if it be, all that is above that quantity is needless. The fourth was, that the punishment should be adjusted in such manner to each individual offence, that every part of the mischief of that offence may have a penalty (that is, a tutelary motive) to encounter it: otherwise, with respect to so much of the offense as has not a penalty to correspond to it, it is as if there were no punishment in the case. Now to none of those rules can a lot of punishment be conformable, unless, for every variation in point of quantity, in the mischief of the species of offense to which it is annexed, such lot of punishment admits of a correspondent variation. To prove this, let the profit of the offence admit of a multitude of degrees. Suppose it, then, at any one of these degrees: if the punishment be less than what is suitable to that degree, it will be inefficacious; it will be so much thrown away: if it be more, as far as the difference extends, it will be needless; it will therefore be thrown away also in that case.

The first property, therefore, that ought to be given to a lot of punishment, is that of being variable in point of quantity, in conformity to every variation which can take place in either the profit or mischief of the offense. This property might, perhaps, be termed, in a single word, variability.

 A second property, intimately connected with the former, may be styled equability. It will avail but little, that a mode of punishment (proper in all other respects) has been established by the legislator; and that capable of being screwed up or let down to any degree that can be required; if, after all, whatever degree of it be pitched upon, that same degree shall be liable, according to circumstances, to produce a very heavy degree of pain, or a very slight one, or even none at all. In this case, as in the former, if circumstances happen one way, there will be a great deal of pain produced which will be needless: if the other way, there will be no pain at all applied, or none that will be efficacious. A punishment, when liable to this irregularity, may be styled an unequable one: when free from it, an equable one. The quantity of pain produced by the punishment will, it is true, depend in a considerable degree upon circumstances distinct from the nature of the punishment itself: upon the condition which the offender is in, with respect to the circumstances by which a man's sensibility is liable to be influenced. But the influence of these very circumstances will in many cases be reciprocally influenced by the nature of the punishment: in other words, the pain which is produced by any mode of punishment, will be the joint effect of the punishment which is applied to him, and the circumstances in which he is exposed to it. Now there are some punishments, of which the effect may be liable to undergo a greater alteration by the influence of such foreign circumstances, than the effect of other punishments is liable to undergo. So far, then, as this is the case, equability or unequability may be regarded as properties belonging to the punishment itself.

 An example of a mode of punishment which is apt to be unequable, is that of banishment, when the locus a quo (or place the party is banished from) is some determinate place appointed by the law, which perhaps the offender cares not whether he ever see or no. This is also the case with pecuniary, or quasi-pecuniary punishment, when it respects some particular species of property, which the offender may have been possessed of, or not, as it may happen. All these punishments may be split down into parcels, and measured out with the utmost nicety: being divisible by time, at least, if by nothing else. They are not, therefore, any of them defective in point of variability: and yet, in many cases, this defect in point of equability may make them as unfit for use as if they were.
103

 The third rule of proportion was, that where two offenses come in competition, the punishment for the greater offenses must be sufficient to induce a man to prefer the less. Now, to be sufficient for this purpose, it must be evidently and uniformly greater: greater, not in the eyes of some men only, but of all men who are liable to be in a situation to take their choice between the two offenses; that is, in effect, of all mankind. In other words, the two punishments must be perfectly commensurable. Hence arises a third property, which may be termed commensurability: to wit, with reference to other punishments.
104

 But punishments of different kinds are in very few instances uniformly greater one than another; especially when the lowest degrees of that which is ordinarily the greater, are compared with the highest degrees of that which is ordinarily the less: in other words, punishments of different kinds are in few instances uniformly commensurable. The only certain and universal means of making two lots of punishment perfectly commensurable, is by making the lesser an ingredient in the composition of the greater. This may be done in either of two ways. 1. By adding to the lesser punishment another quantity of punishment of the same kind. 2. By adding to it another quantity of a different kind. The latter mode is not less certain than the former: for though one cannot always be absolutely sure, that to the same person a given punishment will appear greater than another given punishment; yet one may be always absolutely sure, that any given punishment, so as it does but come into contemplation, will appear greater than none at all.

 Again: Punishment cannot act any farther than in as far as the idea of it, and of its connection with the offense, is present in the mind. The idea of it, if not present, cannot act at all; and then the punishment itself must be inefficacious. Now, to be present, it must be remembered, and to be remembered it must have been learnt. But of all punishments that can be imagined, there are none of which the connection with the offense is either so easily learnt, or so efficaciously remembered, as those of which the idea is already in part associated with some part of the idea of the offense: which is the case when the one and the other have some circumstance that belongs to them in common. When this is the case with a punishment and an offense, the punishment is said to bear an analogy to, or to be characteristic of, the offence.
105
 Characteristicalness is, therefore, a fourth property, which on this account ought to be given, whenever it can conveniently be given, to a lot of punishment.

 It is obvious, that the effect of this contrivance will be the greater, as the analogy is the closer. The analogy will be the closer, the more material
106
 that circumstance is, which is in common. Now the most material circumstance that can belong to an offense and a punishment in common, is the hurt or damage which they produce. The closest analogy, therefore, that can subsist between an offense and the punishment annexed to it, is that which subsists between them when the hurt or damage they produce is of the same nature: in other words, that which is constituted by the circumstance of identity in point of damage.
107
 Accordingly, the mode of punishment, which of all others bears the closest analogy to the offense, is that which in the proper and exact sense of the word is termed retaliation. Retaliation, therefore, in the few cases in which it is practicable, and not too expensive, will have one great advantage over every other mode of punishment.

 Again: It is the idea only of the punishment (or, in other words, the apparent punishment) that really acts upon the mind; the punishment itself (the real punishment) acts not any farther than as giving rise to that idea. It is the apparent punishment, therefore, that does all the service, I mean in the way of example, which is the principal object.
108
 It is the real punishment that does all the mischief.
109
 Now the ordinary and obvious way of increasing the magnitude of the apparent punishment, is by increasing the magnitude of the real. The apparent magnitude, however, may to a certain degree be increased by other less expensive means: whenever, therefore, at the same time that these less expensive means would have answered that purpose, an additional real punishment is employed, this additional real punishment is needless. As to these less expensive means, they consist, 1. In the choice of a particular mode of punishment, a punishment of a particular quality, independent of the quantity.
110
 2. In a particular set of solemnities distinct from the punishment itself, and accompanying the execution of it.
111

 A mode of punishment, according as the appearance of it bears a greater proportion to the reality, may be said to be the more exemplary. Now as to what concerns the choice of the punishment itself, there is not any means by which a given quantity of punishment can be rendered more exemplary, than by choosing it of such a sort as shall bear an analogy to the offense. Hence another reason for rendering the punishment analogous to, or in other words characteristic of, the offense.

 Punishment, it is still to be remembered, is in itself an expense: it is in itself an evil.
112
 Accordingly the fifth rule of proportion is, not to produce more of it than what is demanded by the other rules. But this is the case as often as any particle of pain is produced, which contributes nothing to the effect proposed. Now if any mode of punishment is more apt than another to produce any such superfluous and needless pain, it may be styled unfrugal; if less, it may be styled frugal. Frugality, therefore, is a sixth property to be wished for in a mode of punishment.

 The perfection of frugality, in a mode of punishment, is where not only no superfluous pain is produced on the part of the person punished, but even that same operation, by which he is subjected to pain, is made to answer the purpose of producing pleasure on the part of some other person. Understand a profit or stock of pleasure of the self-regarding kind: for a pleasure of the dissocial kind is produced almost of course, on the part of all persons in whose breasts the offence has excited the sentiment of ill-will. Now this is the case with pecuniary punishment, as also with such punishments of the quasi-pecuniary kind as consist in the subtraction of such a species of possession as is transferable from one party to another. The pleasure, indeed, produced by such an operation, is not in general equal to the pain:
113
 it may, however, be so in particular circumstances, as where he, from whom the thing is taken, is very rich, and he, to whom it is given, very poor: and, be it what it will, it is always so much more than can be produced by any other mode of punishment.

 The properties of exemplarity and frugality seem to pursue the same immediate end, though by different courses. Both are occupied in diminishing the ratio of the real suffering to the apparent: but exemplarity tends to increase the apparent; frugality to reduce the real.

 Thus much concerning the properties to be given to punishments in general, to whatsoever offenses they are to be applied. Those which follow are of less importance, either as referring only to certain offenses in particular, or depending upon the influence of transitory and local circumstances.

In the first place, the four distinct ends into which the main and general end of punishment is divisible,
114
 may give rise to so many distinct properties, according as any particular mode of punishment appear to be more particularly adapted to the compassing of one or of another of those ends. To that of example, as being the principal one, a particular property has already been adapted. There remains the three inferior ones of reformation, disablement, and compensation.

 A seventh property, therefore, to be wished for in a mode of punishment, is that of subserviency to reformation, or reforming tendency. Now any punishment is subservient to reformation in proportion to its quantity: since the greater the punishment a man has experienced, the stronger is the tendency it has to create in him an aversion towards the offense which was the cause of it: and that with respect to all offenses alike. But there are certain punishments which, with regard to certain offenses, have a particular tendency to produce that effect by reason of their quality: and where this is the case, the punishments in question, as applied to the offenses in question, will pro tanto have the advantage over all others. This influence will depend upon the nature of the motive which is the cause of the offence: the punishment most subservient to reformation will be the sort of punishment that is best calculated to invalidate the force of that motive.

 Thus, in offenses originating from the motive of ill-will,
115
 that punishment has the strongest reforming tendency, which is best calculated to weaken the force of the irascible affections. And more particularly, in that sort of offense which consists in an obstinate refusal, on the part of the offender, to do something which is lawfully required of him,
116
 and in which the obstinacy is in great measure kept up by his resentment against those who have an interest in forcing him to compliance, the most efficacious punishment seems to be that of confinement to spare diet.

 Thus, also, in offenses which owe their birth to the joint influence of indolence and pecuniary interest, that punishment seems to possess the strongest reforming tendency, which is best calculated to weaken the force of the former of those dispositions. And more particularly, in the cases of theft, embezzlement, and every species of defraudment, the mode of punishment best adapted to this purpose seems, in most cases, to be that of penal labour.

 An eighth property to be given to a lot of punishment in certain cases, is that of efficacy with respect to disablement, or, as it might be styled more briefly, disabling efficacy. This is a property which may be given in perfection to a lot of punishment; and that with much greater certainty than the property of subserviency to reformation. The inconvenience is, that this property is apt, in general, to run counter to that of frugality: there being, in most cases, no certain way of disabling a man from doing mischief, without, at the same time, disabling him, in a great measure, from doing good, either to himself or others. The mischief therefore of the offense must be so great as to demand a very considerable lot of punishment, for the purpose of example, before it can warrant the application of a punishment equal to that which is necessary for the purpose of disablement.

 The punishment, of which the efficacy in this way is the greatest, is evidently that of death. In this case the efficacy of it is certain. This accordingly is the punishment peculiarly adapted to those cases in which the name of the offender, so long as he lives, may be sufficient to keep a whole nation in a flame. This will now and then be the case with competitors for the sovereignty, and leaders of the factions in civil wars: though, when applied to offenses of so questionable a nature, in which the question concerning criminality turns more upon success than any thing else; an infliction of this sort may seem more to savour of hostility than punishment. At the same time this punishment, it is evident, is in an eminent degree unfrugal; which forms one among the many objections there are against the use of it, in any but very extraordinary cases.
117

 In ordinary cases the purpose may be sufficiently answered by one or other of the various kinds of confinement and banishment: of which, imprisonment is the most strict and efficacious. For when an offense is so circumstanced that it cannot be committed but in a certain place, as is the case, for the most part, with offenses against the person, all the law has to do, in order to disable the offender from committing it, is to prevent his being in that place. In any of the offenses which consist in the breach or the abuse of any kind of trust, the purpose may be compassed at a still cheaper rate, merely by forfeiture of the trust: and in general, in any of those offenses which can only be committed under favour of some relation in which the offender stands with reference to any person, or sets of persons, merely by forfeiture of that relation: that is, of the right of continuing to reap the advantages belonging to it. This is the case, for instance, with any of those offences which consist in an abuse of the privileges of marriage, or of the liberty of carrying on any lucrative or other occupation.

 The ninth property is that of subserviency to compensation. This property of punishment, if it be vindictive compensation that is in view, will, with little variation, be in proportion to the quantity: if lucrative, it is the peculiar and characteristic property of pecuniary punishment.

 In the rear of all these properties may be introduced that of popularity; a very fleeting and indeterminate kind of property, which may belong to a lot of punishment one moment, and be lost by it the next. By popularity is meant the property of being acceptable, or rather not unacceptable, to the bulk of the people, among whom it is proposed to be established. In strictness of speech, it should rather be called absence of unpopularity: for it cannot be expected, in regard to such a matter as punishment, that any species or lot of it should be positively acceptable and grateful to the people: it is sufficient, for the most part, if they have no decided aversion to the thoughts of it. Now the property of characteristicalness, above noticed, seems to go as far towards conciliating the approbation of the people to a mode of punishment, as any; insomuch that popularity may be regarded as a kind of secondary quality, depending upon that of characteristicalness.
118
 The use of inserting this property in the catalogue, is chiefly to make it serve by way of memento to the legislator not to introduce, without a cogent necessity, any mode or lot of punishment, towards which he happens to perceive any violent aversion entertained by the body of the people.

 The effects of unpopularity in a mode of punishment are analogous to those of unfrugality. The unnecessary pain which denominates a punishment unfrugal, is most apt to be that which is produced on the part of the offender. A portion of superfluous pain is in like manner produced when the punishment is unpopular: but in this case it is produced on the part of persons altogether innocent, the people at large. This is already one mischief; and another is, the weakness which it is apt to introduce into the law. When the people are satisfied with the law, they voluntarily lend their assistance in the execution: when they are dissatisfied, they will naturally withhold that assistance; it is well if they do not take a positive part in raising impediments. This contributes greatly to the uncertainty of the punishment; by which, in the first instance, the frequency of the offense receives an increase. In process of time that deficiency, as usual, is apt to draw on an increase in magnitude: an addition of a certain quantity which otherwise would be needless.
119

 This property, it is to be observed, necessarily supposes, on the part of the people, some prejudice or other, which it is the business of the legislator to endeavour to correct. For if the aversion to the punishment in question were grounded on, the principle of utility, the punishment would be such as, on other accounts, ought not to be employed: in which case its popularity or unpopularity would never be worth drawing into question. It is properly therefore a property not so much of the punishment as of the people: a disposition to entertain an unreasonable dislike against an object which merits their approbation. It is the sign also of another property, to wit. indolence or weakness, on the part of the legislator: in suffering the people for the want of some instruction, which ought to be and might be given them, to quarrel with their own interest. Be this as it may, so long as any such dissatisfaction subsists, it behoves the legislator to have an eye to it, as much as if it were ever so well grounded. Every nation is liable to have its prejudices and its caprices which it is the business of the legislator to look out for, to study, and to cure.
120

 The eleventh and last of all the properties that seem to be requisite in a lot of punishment, is that of remissibility.
121
 The general presumption is, that when punishment is applied, punishment is needful: that it ought to be applied, and therefore cannot want to be remitted. But in very particular, and those always very deplorable cases, it may by accident happen otherwise. It may happen that punishment shall have been inflicted, where, according to the intention of the law itself, it ought not to have been inflicted: that is, where the sufferer is innocent of the offense. At the time of the sentence passed he appeared guilty: but since then, accident has brought his innocence to light. This being the case, so much of the destined punishment as he has suffered already, there is no help for. The business is then to free him from as much as is yet to come. But is there any yet to come? There is very little chance of there being any, unless it be so much as consists of chronical punishment: such as imprisonment, banishment, penal labour, and the like. So much as consists of acute punishment, to wit where the penal process itself is over presently, however permanent the punishment may be in its effects, may be considered as irremissible. This is the case, for example, with whipping, branding, mutilation, and capital punishment. The most perfectly irremissible of any is capital punishment. For though other punishments cannot, when they are over, be remitted, they may be compensated for; and although the unfortunate victim cannot be put into the same condition, yet possibly means may be found of putting him into as good a condition, as he would have been in if he had never suffered. This may in general be done very effectually where the punishment has been no other than pecuniary.

There is another case in which the property of remissibility may appear to be of use: this is, where, although the offender has been justly punished, yet on account of some good behaviour of his, displayed at a time subsequent to that of the commencement of the punishment, it may seem expedient to remit a part of it. But this it can scarcely be, if the proportion of the punishment is, in other respects, what it ought to be. The purpose of example is the more important object, in comparison of that of reformation.
122
 It is not very likely, that less punishment should be required for the former purpose than for the latter. For it must be rather an extraordinary case, if a punishment, which is sufficient to deter a man who has only thought of it for a few moments, should not be sufficient to deter a man who has been feeling it all the time. Whatever, then, is required for the purpose of example, must abide at all events: it is not any reformation on the part of the offender, that can warrant the remitting of any part of it: if it could, a man would have nothing to do but to reform immediately, and so free himself from the greatest part of that punishment which was deemed necessary. In order, then, to warrant the remitting of any part of a punishment upon this ground, it must first be supposed that the punishment at first appointed was more than was necessary for the purpose of example, and consequently that a part of it was needless upon the whole. This, indeed, is apt enough to be the case, under the imperfect systems that are as yet on foot: and therefore, during the continuance of those systems, the property of remissibility may, on this second ground likewise, as well as on the former, be deemed a useful one. But this would not be the case in any new-constructed system, in which the rules of proportion above laid down should be observed. In such a system, therefore, the utility of this property would rest solely on the former ground.

 Upon taking a survey of the various possible modes of punishment, it will appear evidently, that there is not any one of them that possesses all the above properties in perfection. To do the best that can be done in the way of punishment, it will therefore be necessary, upon most occasions, to compound them, and make them into complex lots, each consisting of a number of different modes of punishment put together: the nature and proportions of the constituent parts of each lot being different, according to the nature of the offence which it is designed to combat.

 It may not be amiss to bring together, and exhibit in one view, the eleven properties above established. They are as follows:

Two of them are concerned in establishing a proper proportion between a single offense and its punishment; viz.

1. Variability.
2. Equability.
One, in establishing a proportion, between more offences than one, and more punishments than one; viz.

3. Commensurability.
A fourth contributes to place the punishment in that situation in which alone it can be efficacious; and at the same time to be bestowing on it the two farther properties of exemplarity and popularity; viz.

4. Characteristicalness.
Two others are concerned in excluding all useless punishment; the one indirectly, by heightening the efficacy of what is useful; the other in a direct way; viz.

5. Exemplarity.
6. Frugality.
Three others contribute severally to the three inferior ends of punishment; viz.

7. Subserviency to reformation.
8. Efficacy in disabling.
9. Subserviency to compensation.
Another property tends to exclude a collateral mischief, which a particular mode of punishment is liable accidentally to produce; viz.

10. Popularity.
The remaining property tends to palliate a mischief, which all punishment, as such is liable accidentally to produce; viz.

11. Remissibility.
The properties of commensurability, characteristicalness, exemplarity, subserviency to reformation, and efficacy in disabling, are more particularly calculated to augment the profit which is to be made by punishment: frugality, subserviency to compensation, popularity, and remissibility, to diminish the expense: variability and equability are alike subservient to both those purposes.

 We now come to take a general survey of the system of offences: that is, of such acts to which, on account of the mischievous consequences they have a natural tendency to produce, and in the view of putting a stop to those consequences, it may be proper to annex a certain artificial consequence, consisting of punishment, to be inflicted on the authors of such acts according to the principles just established.

Chapter XVI (Sections 1-2): DIVISION OF OFFENCES
1
&sect;1.
Classes of Offences.
 It is necessary, at the outset, to make a distinction between such acts as are or may be, and such as ought to be offences.

Any act may be an offence, which they whom the community are in the habit of obeying shall be pleased to make one: that is, any act which they shall be pleased to prohibit or to punish. But, upon the principle of utility, such acts alone ought to be made offences, as the good of the community requires should be made so.

 The good of the community cannot require, that any act should be made an offence, which is not liable. in some way or other, to be detrimental to the community. For in the case of such an act, all punishment is groundless.
2

 But if the whole assemblage of any number of individuals be considered as constituting an imaginary compound body, a community or political state; any act that is detrimental to any one or more of those members is, as to so much of its effects, detrimental to the state.

 An act cannot be detrimental to a state, but by being detrimental to some one or more of the individuals that compose it. But these individuals may either be assignable
3
 or unassignable.

 When there is any assignable individual to whom an offence is detrimental, that person may either be a person other than the offender, or the offender himself.

 Offences that are detrimental, in the first instance, to assignable persons other than the offender, may be termed by one common name, offences against individuals. And of these may be composed the 1st class of offences. To contrast them with offences of the 2nd and 4th classes, it may also sometimes be convenient to style them private offences. To contrast them at the same time with offences of the 3rd class, they may be styled private extra-regarding offences.

 When it appears, in general, that there are persons to whom the act in question may be detrimental, but such persons cannot be individually assigned, the circle within which it appears that they may be found, is either of less extent than that which comprises the whole community, or not. If of less, the persons comprised within this lesser circle may be considered for this purpose as composing a body of themselves; comprised within, but distinguishable from, the greater body of the whole community. The circumstance that constitutes the union between the members of this lesser body, may be either their residence within a particular place, or, in short, any other less explicit principle of union, which may serve to distinguish them from the remaining members of the community. In the first case, the act may be styled an offence against a neighbourhood: in the second, an offence against a particular class of persons in the community. Offenses, then, against a class or neighbourhood, may, together, constitute the 2nd class of offences.
4
 To contrast them with private offences on the one hand, and public on the other, they may also be styled semi-public offences.

 Offences, which in the first instance are detrimental to the offender himself, and to no one else, unless it be by their being detrimental to himself, may serve to compose a third class. To contrast them the better with offences of the first, second, and fourth classes, all which are of a transitive nature, they might be styled intransitive
5
 offences; but still better, self-regarding.

 The fourth class may be composed of such acts as ought to be made offences, on account of the distant mischief which they threaten to bring upon an unassignable indefinite multitude of the whole number of individuals, of which the community is composed: although no particular individual should appear more likely to be a sufferer by them than another. These may be called public offences, or offences against the state.

 A fifth class, or appendix, may be composed of such acts as, according to the circumstances in which they are committed, or and more particularly according to the purposes to which they are applied, may be detrimental in any one of the ways in which the act of one man can be detrimental to another. These may to be termed multiform, or heterogeneous
6
 offences. Offences that are in this case may be reduced to two great heads: 1. Offences by falsehood: and 2. Offenses against trust.

&sect; 2.
Divisions and sub-divisions.
 Let us see by what method these classes may be farther subdivided. First, then, with regard to offences against individuals.

In the present period of existence, a man's being and wellbeing, his happiness and his security; in a word, his pleasures and his immunity from pains, are all dependent, more or less, in the first place, upon his own person; in the next place, upon the exterior objects that surround him. These objects are either things, or other persons. Under one or other of these classes must evidently be comprised every sort of exterior object, by means of which his interest can be affected. If then, by means of any offence, a man should on any occasion become a sufferer, it must be in one or other of two ways: 1. absolutely, to wit, immediately in his own person; in which case the offence may be said to be an offence against his person: or, 2. relatively, by reason of some material relation
7
 which the before mentioned exterior objects may happen to bear, in the way of causality (see ch. vii. Actions, par. 24) to his happiness. Now in as far as a man is in a way to derive either happiness or security from any object which belongs to the class of things, such thing is said to be his property, or at least he is said to have a property or an interest therein: an offence, therefore, which tends to lessen the facility he might otherwise have of deriving happiness or security from an object which belongs to the class of things may be styled an offence against his property. With regard to persons, in as far as, from objects of this class, a man is in a way to derive happiness or security, it is in virtue of their services: in virtue of some services, which, by one sort of inducement or another, they may be disposed to render him.
8
 Now, then, take any man, by way of example, and the disposition, whatever it may be, which he may be in to render you service, either has no other connection to give birth or support to it, than the general one which binds him to the whole species, or it has some other connection more particular. In the latter case, such a connection may be spoken of as constituting, in your favour, a kind of fictitious or incorporeal object of property, which is styled your condition. An offence, therefore, the tendency of which is to lessen the facility you might otherwise have of deriving happiness from the services of a person thus specially connected with you, may be styled an offence against your condition in life, or simply against your condition. Conditions in life must evidently be as various as the relations by which they are constituted. This will be seen more particularly farther on. In the mean time those of husband, wife, parent, child, master, servant, citizen of such or such a city, natural-born subject of such or such a country, may answer the purpose of examples.

Where there is no such particular connection, or (what comes to the same thing) where the disposition, whatever it may be, which a man is in to render you service, is not considered as depending upon such connection, but simply upon the good-will he bears to you; in such case, in order to express what chance you have of deriving a benefit from his services, a kind of fictitious object of property is spoken of, as being constituted in your favour, and is called your reputation. An offence, therefore, the tendency of which is to lessen the facility you might otherwise have had of deriving happiness or security from the services of persons at large, whether connected with you or not by any special tie, may be styled an offence against your reputation. It appears, therefore, that if by any offence an individual becomes a sufferer, it must be in one or other of the four points above mentioned; viz. his person, his property, his condition in life, or his reputation. These sources of distinction, then, may serve to form so many subordinate divisions. If any offences should be found to affect a person in more than one of these points at the same time, such offences may respectively be put under so many separate divisions; and such compound divisions may be subjoined to the preceding simple ones. The several divisions (simple and compound together) which are hereinafter established, stand as follows: 1. Offenses against person. 2. Offenses against reputation. 3. Offenses against property. 4. Offenses against condition. 5. Offenses against person and property together. 6. Offenses against person and reputation together.
9

 Next with regard to semi-public offences. Pain, considered with reference to the time of the act from which it is liable to issue, must, it is evident, be either present, past, or future. In as far as it is either present or past, it cannot be the result of any act which comes under the description of a semi-public offence: for if it be present or past, the individuals who experience, or who have experienced, it are assignable.
10
 There remains that sort of mischief, which, if it ever come to exist at all, is as yet but future: mischief, thus circumstanced, takes the name of danger.
11
 Now, then, when by means of the act of any person a whole neighbourhood, or other class of persons, are exposed to danger, this danger must either be intentional on his part, or unintentional.
12
 If unintentional, such danger, when it is converted into actual mischief, takes the name of a calamity: offences, productive of such danger, may be styled semi-public offences operating through calamity; or, more briefly, offences through calamity. If the danger be intentional, insomuch that it might be produced, and might convert itself into actual mischief, without the concurrence of any calamity, it may be said to originate in mere delinquency: offences, then, which, without the concurrence of any calamity, tend to produce such danger as disturbs the security of a local, or other subordinate class of persons, may be styled semi-public offences operating merely by delinquency, or more briefly, offences of mere delinquency.

 With regard to any farther sub-divisions, offences through calamity will depend upon the nature of the several calamities to which man, and the several things that are of use to him, stand exposed. These will be considered in another place.
13

 Semi-public offences of mere delinquency will follow the method of division applied to offences against individuals. It will easily be conceived, that whatever pain or inconvenience any given individual may be made to suffer, to the danger of that pain or inconvenience may any number of individuals, assignable or not assignable, be exposed. Now there are four points or articles, as we have seen, in respect to which an individual may be made to suffer pain or inconvenience. If then, with respect to any one of them, the connection of causes and effects is such, that to the danger of suffering in that article a number of persons, who individually are not assignable, may, by the delinquency of one person, be exposed, such article will form a ground of distinction on which a particular sub-division of semi-public offences may be established: if, with respect to any such article, no such effect can take place, that ground of distinction will lie for the present unoccupied: ready, however, upon any change of circumstances, or in the manner of viewing the subject, to receive a correspondent subdivision of offences, if ever it should seem necessary that any such offences should be created.

 We come next to self-regarding offences; or, more properly, to acts productive in the first instance of no other than a self-regarding mischief: acts which, if in any instance it be thought fit to constitute them offences, will come under the denomination of offences against one's self. This class will not for the present give us much trouble. For it is evident, that in whatever points a man is vulnerable by the hand of another, in the same points may he be conceived to be vulnerable by his own. Whatever divisions therefore will serve for the first class, the same will serve for this. As to the questions, What acts are productive of a mischief of this stamp? and, among such as are, which it may, and which it may not, be worth while
14
 to treat upon the footing of offences? these are points, the latter of which at least is too unsettled, and too open to controversy, to be laid down with that degree of confidence which is implied in the exhibition of properties which are made use of as the groundwork of an arrangement. Properties for this purpose ought to be such as show themselves at first glance, and appear to belong to the subject beyond dispute.

 Public offences may be distributed under eleven divisions.
15
 1. Offences against external security. 2. Offences against justice. 3. Offences against the preventive branch of the police. 4. Offences against the public force. 5. Offences against the positive increase of the national felicity. 6. Offences against the public wealth. 7. Offences against population. 8. Offences against the national wealth. 9. Offences against the sovereignty. 10. Offences against religion. 11. Offences against the national interest in general. The way in which these several sorts of offences connect with one another, and with the interest of the public, that is, of an unassignable multitude of the individuals of which that body is composed, may be thus conceived.

 Mischief by which the interest of the public as above defined may be affected, must, if produced at all, be produced either by means of an influence exerted on the operations of government, or by other means, without the exertion of such influence.
16
 To begin with the latter case: mischief, be it what it will, and let it happen to whom it will, must be produced either by the unassisted powers of the agent in question, or by the instrumentality of some other agents. In the latter case, these agents will be either persons or things. Persons again must be either not members of the community in question, or members. Mischief produced by the instrumentality of persons, may accordingly be produced by the instrumentality either of external or of internal adversaries. Now when it is produced by the agent's own unassisted powers, or by the instrumentality of internal adversaries, or only by the instrumentality of things, it is seldom that it can show itself in any other shape (setting aside any influence it may exert on the operations of government) than either that of an offence against assignable individuals, or that of an offence against a local or other subordinate class of persons. If there should be a way in which mischief can be produced, by any of these means, to individuals altogether unassignable, it will scarcely be found conspicuous or important enough to occupy a title by itself: it may accordingly be referred to the miscellaneous head of offences against the national interest in general.
17
 The only mischief, of any considerable account, which can be made to impend indiscriminately over the whole number of members in the community, is that complex kind of mischief which results from a state of war, and is produced by the instrumentality of external adversaries; by their being provoked, for instance, or invited, or encouraged to invasion. In this way may a man very well bring down a mischief, and that a very heavy one, upon the whole community in general, and that without taking a part in any of the injuries which came in consequence to be offered to particular individuals.

Next with regard to the mischief which an offence may bring upon the public by its influence on the operations of the government. This it may occasion either, 1. In a more immediate way, by its influence on those operations themselves: 2. In a more remote way, by its influence on the instruments by or by the help of which those operations should be performed: or 3. In a more remote way still, by its influence on the sources from whence such instruments are to be derived. First then, as to the operations of government, the tendency of these, in as far as it is conformable to what on the principle of utility it ought to be, is in every case either to avert mischief from the community, or to make an addition to the sum of positive good.
18
 Now mischief, we have seen, must come either from external adversaries, from internal adversaries, or from calamities. With regard to mischief from external adversaries, there requires no further division. As to mischief from internal adversaries, the expedients employed for averting it may be distinguished into such as may be applied before the discovery of any mischievous design in particular, and such as cannot be employed but in consequence of the discovery of some such design: the former of these are commonly referred to a branch which may be styled the preventive branch of the police: the latter to that of justice.
19
 Secondly, As to the instruments which government, whether in the averting of evil or in the producing of positive good, can have to work with, these must be either persons or things. Those which are destined to the particular function of guarding against mischief from adversaries in general, but more particularly from external adversaries,
20
 may be distinguished from the rest under the collective appellation of the public military force, and, for conciseness' sake, the military force. The rest may be characterised by the collective appellation of the public wealth. Thirdly, with regard to the sources or funds from whence these instruments, howsoever applied, must be derived, such of them as come under the denomination of persons must be taken out of the whole number of persons that are in the community, that is, out of the total population of the state: so that the greater the population, the greater may cæteris paribus be this branch of the public wealth; and the less, the less. In like manner, such as come under the denomination of things may be, and most of them commonly are, taken out of the sum total of those things which are the separate properties of the several members of the community: the sum of which properties may be termed the national wealth:
21
 so that the greater the national wealth, the greater cæteris paribus may be this remaining branch of the public wealth; and the less, the less. It is here to be observed, that if the influence exerted on any occasion by any individual over the operations of the government be pernicious, it must be in one or other of two ways: 1. By causing, or tending to cause, operations not to be performed which ought to be performed; in other words, by impeding the operations of government. Or, 2. By causing operations to be performed which ought not to be performed; in other words, by misdirecting them. Lastly, to the total assemblage of the persons by whom the several political operations above mentioned come to be performed, we set out with applying the collective appellation of the government. Among these persons there commonly
22
 is some one person, or body of persons whose office it is to assign and distribute to the rest their several departments, to determine the conduct to be pursued by each in the performance of the particular set of operations that belongs to him, and even upon occasion to exercise his function in his stead. Where there is any such person, or body of persons, he or it may, according as the turn of the phrase requires, be termed the sovereign, or the sovereignty. Now it is evident, that to impede or misdirect the operations of the sovereign, as here described, may be to impede or misdirect the operations of the several departments of government as described above.

From this analysis, by which the connection between the several above-mentioned heads of offences is exhibited, we may now collect a definition for each article. By offences against external security, we may understand such offences whereof the tendency is to bring upon the public a mischief resulting from the hostilities of foreign adversaries. By offences against justice, such offences whereof the tendency is to impede or misdirect the operations of that power which is employed in the business of guarding the public against the mischiefs resulting from the delinquency of internal adversaries, as far as it is to be done by expedients, which do not come to be applied in any case till after the discovery of some particular design of the sort of those which they are calculated to prevent. By offences against the preventive branch of the police, such offences whereof the tendency is to impede or misdirect the operations of that power which is employed in guarding against mischiefs resulting from the delinquency of internal adversaries, by expedients that come to be applied beforehand; or of that which is employed in guarding against the mischiefs that might be occasioned by physical calamities. By offences against the public force, such offences whereof the tendency is to impede or misdirect the operations of that power which is destined to guard the public from the mischiefs which may result from the hostility of foreign adversaries, and, in case of necessity, in the capacity of ministers of justice, from mischiefs of the number of those which result from the delinquency of internal adversaries.

By offences against the increase of the national felicity, such offences whereof the tendency is to impede or misapply the operations of those powers that are employed in the conducting of various establishments, which are calculated to make, in so many different ways, a positive addition to the stock of public happiness. By offences against the public wealth, such offences whereof the tendency is to diminish the amount or misdirect the application of the money, and other articles of wealth, which the government reserves as a fund, out of which the stock of instruments employed in the service above mentioned may be kept up. By offences against population, such offences whereof the tendency is to diminish the numbers or impair the political value of the sum total of the members of the community. By offences against the national wealth, such offences whereof the tendency is to diminish the quantity, or impair the value, of the things which compose the separate properties or estates of the several members of the community.

 In this deduction, it may be asked, what place is left for religion? This we shall see presently. For combating the various kinds of offences above enumerated, that is, for combating all the offences (those not excepted which we are now about considering) which it is in man's nature to commit, the state has two great engines, punishment and reward: punishment, to be applied to all, and upon all ordinary occasions: reward, to be applied to a few, for particular purposes, and upon extraordinary occasions. But whether or no a man has done the act which renders him an object meet for punishment or reward, the eyes of those, whosoever they be, to whom the management of these engines is entrusted cannot always see, nor, where it is punishment that is to be administered, can their hands be always sure to reach him. To supply these deficiencies in point of power, it is thought necessary, or at least useful (without which the truth of the doctrine would be nothing to the purpose), to inculcate into the minds of the people the belief of the existence of a power applicable to the same purposes, and not liable to the same deficiencies: the power of a supreme invisible being, to whom a disposition of contributing to the same ends to which the several institutions already mentioned are calculated to contribute, must for this purpose be ascribed. It is of course expected that this power will, at one time or other, be employed in the promoting of those ends: and to keep up and strengthen this expectation among men, is spoken of as being the employment of a kind of allegorical personage, feigned, as before,
23
 for convenience of discourse, and styled religion. To diminish, then, or misapply the influence of religion, is pro tanto to diminish or misapply what power the state has of combating with effect any of the before-enumerated kinds of offences; that is, all kinds of offences whatsoever. Acts that appear to have this tendency may be styled offences against religion. Of these then may be composed the tenth division of the class of offences against the state.
24

 If there be any acts which appear liable to affect the state in any one or more of the above ways, by operating in prejudice of the external security of the state, or of its internal security; of the public force; of the increase of the national felicity; of the public wealth; of the national population; of the national wealth; of the sovereignty; or of religion; at the same time that it is not clear in which of all these ways they will affect it most, nor but that, according to contingencies, they may affect it in one of these ways only or in another; such acts may be collected together under a miscellaneous division by themselves, and styled offences against the national interest in general. Of these then may be composed the eleventh and last division of the class of offences against the state.

 We come now to class the fifth: consisting of multiform offences. These, as has been already intimated, are either offences by falsehood, or offences concerning trust. Under the head of offences by falsehood, may be comprehended, 1. Simple falsehoods. 2. Forgery. 3. Personation. 4. Perjury.
25
 Let us observe in what particulars these four kinds of falsehood agree, and in what they differ.

 Offences by falsehood, however diversified in other particulars, have this in common, that they consist in some abuse of the faculty of discourse, or rather, as we shall see hereafter, of the faculty of influencing the sentiment of belief in other men,
26
 whether by discourse or otherwise. The use of discourse is to influence belief, and that in such manner as to give other men to understand that things are as they are really. Falsehoods, of whatever kind they be, agree in this: that they give men to understand that things are otherwise than as in reality they are.

 Personation, forgery, and perjury, are each of them distinguished from other modes of uttering falsehood by certain special circumstances. When a falsehood is not accompanied by any of those circumstanees, it may be styled simple falsehood. These circumstances are, 1. The form in which the falsehood is uttered. 2. The circumstance of its relating or not to the identity of the person of him who utters it. 3. The solemnity of the occasion on which it is uttered.
27
 The particular application of these distinctive characters may more commodiously be reserved for another place.
28

 We come now to the sub-divisions of offences by falsehood. These will bring us back into the regular track of analysis, pursued, without deviation, through the four preceding classes.

By whatever means a mischief is brought about, whether falsehood be or be not of the number, the individuals liable to be affected by it must either be assignable or unassignable. If assignable, there are but four material articles in respect to which they can be affected: to wit, their persons, their properties, their reputations, and their conditions in life. The case is the same, if, though unassignable, they are comprisable in any class subordinate to that which is composed of the whole number of members of the state. If the falsehood tend to the detriment of the whole state, it can only be by operating in one or other of the characters, which every act that is an offence against the state must assume; viz. that of an offence against external security, against justice, against the preventive branch of the police, against the public force, against the increase of the national felicity, against the public wealth, against the national population, against the national wealth, against the sovereignty of the state, or against its religion.

 It is the common property, then, of the offences that belong to this division, to run over the same ground that is occupied by those of the preceding classes. But some of them, as we shall see, are apt, on various occasions, to drop or change the names which bring them under this division: this is chiefly the case with regard to simple falsehoods. Others retain their names unchanged; and even thereby supersede the names which would otherwise belong to the offences which they denominate: this is chiefly the case with regard to personation, forgery, and perjury. When this circumstance then, the circumstance of falsehood, intervenes, in some cases the name which takes the lead is that which indicates the offence by its effect; in other cases, it is that which indicates the expedient or instrument as it were by the help of which the offence is committed. Falsehood, take it by itself, consider it as not being accompanied by any other material circumstances, nor therefore productive of any material effects, can never, upon the principle of utility, constitute any offence at all. Combined with other circumstances, there is scarce any sort of pernicious effect which it may not be instrumental in producing. It is therefore rather in compliance with the laws of language, than in consideration of the nature of the things themselves, that falsehoods are made separate mention of under the name and in the character of distinct offences. All this would appear plain enough, if it were now a time for entering into particulars: but that is what cannot be done, consistently with any principle of order or convenience, until the inferior divisions of those other classes shall have been previously exhibited.

 We come now to offences against trust. A trust is, where there is any particular act which one party, in the exercise of some power, or some right,
29
 which is conferred on him, is bound to perform for the benefit of another. Or, more fully, thus: A party is said to be invested with a trust, when, being invested with a power, or with a right, there is a certain behaviour which, in the exercise of that power, or of that right, he is bound to maintain for the benefit of some other party. In such case, the party first mentioned is styled a trustee: for the other party, no name has ever yet been found: for want of a name, there seems to be no other resource than to give a new and more extensive sense to the word beneficiary, or to say at length the party to be benefited.
30

The trustee is also said to have a trust conferred or imposed upon him, to be invested with a trust, to have had a trust given him to execute, to perform, to discharge, or to fulfil. The party to be benefited, is said to have a trust established or created in his favour: and so on through a variety of other phrases.

 Now it may occur, that a trust is oftentimes spoken of as a species of condition:
31
 that a trust is also spoken of as a species of property: and that a condition itself is also spoken of same light. It may be thought, therefore, that in the first class, the division of offences against condition should have been included under that of the offences against property: and that at any rate, so much of the fifth class now before us as contains offences against trust, should have been included under one or other of those two divisions of the first class. But upon examination it will appear, that no one of these divisions could with convenience, nor even perhaps with propriety, have been included under either of the other two. It will appear at the same time, that there is an intimate connection subsisting amongst them all: insomuch that of the lists of the offences to which they are respectively exposed, any one may serve in great measure as a model for any other. There are certain offences to which all trusts as such are exposed: to all these offences every sort of condition will be found exposed: at the same time that particular species of the offences against trust will, upon their application to particular conditions, receive different particular denominations. It will appear also, that of the two groups of offences into which the list of those against trust will be found naturally to divide itself, there is one, and but one, to which property, taken in its proper and more confined sense, stands exposed: and that these, in their application to the subject of property, will be found susceptible of distinct modifications, to which the usage of language, and the occasion there is for distinguishing them in point of treatment, make it necessary to find names.

In the first place, as there are, or at least may be (as we shall see) conditions which are not trusts,
32
 so there are trusts of which the idea would not be readily and naturally understood to be included under the word condition: add to which, that of those conditions which do include a trust, the greater number include other ingredients along with it: so that the idea of a condition, if on the one hand it stretches beyond the idea of a trust, does on the other hand fall short of it. Of the several sorts of trusts, by far the most important are those in which it is the public that stands in the relation of beneficiary. Now these trusts, it should seem, would hardly present themselves at first view upon the mention of the word condition. At any rate, what is more material, the most important of the offences against these kinds of trust would not seem to be included under the denomination of offences against condition. The offences which by this latter appellation would be brought to view, would be such only as seemed to affect the interests of an individual: of him, for example, who is considered as being invested with that condition. But in offences against public trust, it is the influence they have on the interests of the public that constitutes by much the most material part of their pernicious tendency: the influence they have on the interests of any individual, the only part of their influence which would be readily brought to view by the appellation of offences against condition, is comparatively as nothing. The word trust directs the attention at once to the interests of that party for whom the person in question is trustee: which party, upon the addition of the epithet public, is immediately understood to be the body composed of the whole assemblage, or an indefinite portion of the whole assemblage of the members of the state. The idea presented by the words public trust is clear and unambiguous: it is but an obscure and ambiguous garb that that idea could be expressed in by the words public condition. It appears, therefore, that the principal part of the offences, included under the denomination of offences against trust, could not, commodiously at least, have been included under the head of offences against condition.

It is evident enough, that for the same reasons neither could they have been included under the head of offences against property. It would have appeared preposterous, and would have argued a total inattention to the leading principle of the whole work, the principle of utility, to have taken the most mischievous and alarming part of the offences to which the public stands exposed, and forced them into the list of offences against the property of an individual: of that individual, to wit, who in that case would be considered as having in him the property of that public trust, which by the offences in question is affected.

Nor would it have been less improper to have included conditions, all of them, under the head of property: and thereby the whole catalogue of offences against condition, under the catalogue of offences against property. True it is, that there are offences against condition, which perhaps with equal propriety, and without any change in their nature, might be considered in the light of offences against property: so extensive and so vague are the ideas that are wont to be annexed to both these objects. But there are other offences which though with unquestionable propriety they might be referred to the head of offences against condition, could not, without the utmost violence done to language, be forced under the appellation of offences against property. Property, considered with respect to the proprietor, implies invariably a benefit, and nothing else: whatever obligations or burthens may, by accident, stand annexed to it, yet in itself it can never be otherwise than beneficial. On the part of the proprietor, it is created not by any commands that are laid on him, but by his being left free to do with such or such an article as he likes. The obligations it is created by, are in every instance laid upon other people. On the other hand, as to conditions, there are several which are of a mixed nature, importing as well a burthen to him who stands invested with them as a benefit: which indeed is the case with those conditions which we hear most of under that name, and which make the greatest figure.

There are even conditions which import nothing but burthen, without any spark of benefit. Accordingly, when between two parties there is such a relation, that one of them stands in the place of an object of property with respect to the other; the word property is applied only on one side; but the word condition is applied alike to both: it is but one of them that is said on that account to be possessed of property; but both of them are alike spoken of as being possessed of or being invested with a condition: it is the master alone that is considered as possessing a property, of which the servant, in virtue of the services he is bound to render, is the object: but the servant, not less than the master, is spoken of as possessing or being invested with a condition.

The case is, that if a man's condition is ever spoken of as constituting an article of his property, it is in the same loose and indefinite sense of the word in which almost every other offence that could be imagined might be reckoned into the list of offences against property. If the language indeed were in every instance, in which it made use of the phrase, object of property, perspicuous enough to point out under that appellation the material and really existent body, the person or the thing in which those acts terminate, by the performance of which the property is said to be enjoyed; if, in short, in the import given to the phrase object of property, it made no other use of it than the putting it to signify what is now called a corporeal object, this difficulty and this confusion would not have occurred. But the import of the phrase object of property, and in consequence the import of the word property, has been made to take a much wider range. In almost every case in which the law does any thing for a man's benefit or advantage, men are apt to speak of it, on some occasion or other, as conferring on him a sort of property. At the same time, for one reason or other, it has in several cases been not practicable, or not agreeable, to bring to view, under the appellation of the object of his property, the thing in which the acts, by the performance of which the property is said to be enjoyed, have their termination, or the person in whom they have their commencement. Yet something which could be spoken of under that appellation was absolutely requisite.
33
 The expedient then has been to create, as it were, on every occasion, an ideal being, and to assign to a man this ideal being for the object of his property: and these are the sort of objects to which men of science, in taking a view of the operations of the law in this behalf, came, in process of time, to give the name of incorporeal. Now of these incorporeal objects of property the variety is prodigious. Fictitious entities of this kind have been fabricated almost out of every thing: not conditions only (that of a trustee included), but even reputation have been of the number. Even liberty has been considered in this same point of view: and though on so many occasions it is contrasted with property, yet on other occasions, being reckoned into the catalogue of possessions, it seems to have been considered as a branch of property. Some of these applications of the words property, object of property (the last, for instance), are looked upon, indeed, as more figurative, and less proper than the rest: but since the truth is, that where the immediate object is incorporeal, they are all of them improper, it is scarce practicable any where to draw the line.

Notwithstanding all this latitude, yet, among the relations in virtue of which you are said to be possessed of a condition, there is one at least which can scarcely, by the most forced construction, be said to render any other man, or any other thing, the object of your property. This is the right of persevering in a certain course of action; for instance, in the exercising of a certain trade. Now to confer on you this right, in a certain degree at least, the law has nothing more to do than barely to abstain from forbidding you to exercise it. Were it to go farther, and, for the sake of enabling you to exercise your trade to the greater advantage, prohibit others from exercising the like, then, indeed, persons might be found, who in a certain sense, and by a construction rather forced than otherwise, might be spoken of as being the objects of your property: viz. by being made to render you that sort of negative service which consists in the forbearing to do those acts which would lessen the profits of your trade. But the ordinary right of exercising any such trade or profession, as is not the object of a monopoly, imports no such thing; and yet, by possessing this right, a man is said to possess a condition: and by forfeiting it, to forfeit his condition.

After all, it will be seen, that there must be cases in which, according to the usage of language, the same offence may, with more or less appearance of propriety, be referred to the head of offences against condition, or that of offences against property, indifferently. In such cases the following rule may serve for drawing the line. Wherever, in virtue of your possessing a property, or being the object of a property possessed by another, you are characterised, according to the usage of language, by a particular name, such as master, servant, husband, wife, steward, agent, attorney, or the like, there the word condition may be employed in exclusion of the word property: and an offence in which, in virtue of your bearing such relation, you are concerned, either in the capacity of an offender, or in that of a party injured, may be referred to the head of offences against condition, and not to that of offences against property. To give an example: Being bound, in the capacity of land steward to a certain person, to oversee the repairing of a certain bridge, you forbear to do so: in this case, as the services you are bound to render are of the number of those which give occasion to the party, from whom they are due, to be spoken of under a certain generical name, viz. that of land steward, the offence of withholding them may be referred to the class of offences against condition. But suppose that, without being engaged in that general and miscellaneous course of service, which with reference to a particular person would denominate you his land steward, you were bound, whether by usage or by contract, to render him that single sort of service which consists in the providing, by yourself or by others, for the repairing of that bridge: in this case, as there is not any such current denomination to which, in virtue of your being bound to render this service, you stand aggregated (for that of architect, mason, or the like, is not here in question), the offence you commit by withholding such service cannot with propriety be referred to the class of offences against condition: it can only therefore be referred to the class of offences against property.

By way of further distinction, it may be remarked, that where a man, in virtue of his being bound to render, or of others being bound to render him, certain services, is spoken of as possessing a condition, the assemblage of services is generally so considerable, in point of duration, as to constitute a course of considerable length, so as on a variety of occasions to come to be varied and repeated: and in most cases, when the condition is not of a domestic nature, sometimes for the benefit of one person, sometimes for that of another. Services which come to be rendered to a particular person on a particular occasion, especially if they be of short duration, have seldom the effect of occasioning either party to be spoken of as being invested with a condition. The particular occasional services which one man may come, by contract or otherwise, to be bound to render to another, are innumerably various: but the number of conditions which have names may be counted, and are, comparatively, but few.

If after all, notwithstanding the rule here given for separating conditions from articles of property, any object should present itself which should appear to be referable, with equal propriety, to either head, the inconvenience would not be material; since in such cases, as will be seen a little farther on, whichever appellation were adopted, the list of the offences, to which the object stands exposed, would be substantially the same.

These difficulties being cleared up, we now proceed to exhibit an analytical view of the several possible offences against trust.

 Offences against trust may be distinguished, in the first place, into such as concern the existence of the trust in the hands of such or such a person, and such as concern the exercise of the functions that belong to it.
34
 First then, with regard to such as relate to its existence. An offence of this description, like one of any other description, if an offence it ought to be, must to some person or other import a prejudice. This prejudice may be distinguished into two branches: 1. That which may fall on such persons as are or should be invested with the trust: 2. That which may fall on the persons for whose sake it is or should be instituted, or on other persons at large. To begin with the former of these branches. Let any trust be conceived. The consequences which it is in the nature of it to be productive of to the possessor, must, in as far as they are material,
35
 be either of an advantageous or of a disadvantageous nature: in as far as they are advantageous, the trust may be considered as a benefit or privilege: in as far as they are disadvantageous, it may be considered as a burthen.
36
 To consider it then upon the footing of a benefit. The trust either is of the number of those which ought by law to subsist;
37
 that is, which the legislator meant should be established; or is not. If it is, the possession which at any time you may be deprived of, with respect to it, must at that time be either present or to come: if to come (in which case it may be regarded either as certain or as contingent), the investitive event, or event from whence your possession of it should have taken its commencement, was either an event in the production of which the will of the offender should have been instrumental, or any other event at large: in the former case, the offence may be termed wrongful non-investment of trust: in the latter case, wrongful interception of trust.
38
 If at the time of the offence whereby you are deprived of it, you were already in possession of it, the offence may be styled wrongful divestment of trust. In any of these cases, the effect of the offence is either to put somebody else into the trust, or not: if not, it is wrongful divestment, wrongful interception, or wrongful divestment, and nothing more: if it be, the person put in possession is either the wrong-doer himself, in which case it may be styled usurpation of trust; or some other person, in which case it may be styled wrongful investment, or attribution, of trust. If the trust in question is not of the number of those which ought to subsist, it depends upon the manner in which one man deprives another of it, whether such deprivation shall or shall not be an offence, and, accordingly, whether non-investment, interception, or divestment, shall or shall not be wrongful. But the putting any body into it must at any rate be an offence: and this offence may be either usurpation or wrongful investment, as before.

In the next place, to consider it upon the footing of a burthen. In this point of view, if no other interest than that of the persons liable to be invested with it were considered, it is what ought not, upon the principle of utility, to subsist: if it ought, it can only be for the sake of the persons in whose favour it is established. If then it ought not on any account to subsist, neither non-investment, interception, nor divestment, can be wrongful with relation to the persons first mentioned, whatever they may be on any other account, in respect of the manner in which they happen to be performed: for usurpation, though not likely to be committed, there is the same room as before: so likewise is there for wrongful investment; which, in as far as the trust is considered as a burthen, may be styled wrongful imposition of trust. If the trust, being still of the burthensome kind, is of the number of those which ought to subsist, any offence that can be committed, with relation to the existence of it, must consist either in causing a person to be in possession of it, who ought not to be, or in causing a person not to be in possession of it who ought to be: in the former case, it must be either usurpation or wrongful divestment, as before: in the latter case, the person who is caused to be not in possession, is either the wrong-doer himself, or some other: if the wrong-doer himself, either at the time of the offence he was in possession of it, or he was not: if he was, it may be termed wrongful abdication of trust; if not, wrongful detrectation
39
 or non-assumption: if the person, whom the offence causes not to be in the trust, is any other person, the offence must be either wrongful divestment, wrongful non-investment, or wrongful interception, as before: in any of which cases to consider the trust in the light of a burthen, it might also be styled wrongful exemption from trust.

Lastly, with regard to the prejudice which the persons for whose benefit the trust is instituted, or any other persons whose interests may come to be affected by its existing or not existing in such or such hands, are liable to sustain. Upon examination it will appear, that by every sort of offence whereby the persons who are or should be in possession of it are liable, in that respect, to sustain a prejudice, the persons now in question are also liable to sustain a prejudice. The prejudice, in this case, is evidently of a very different nature from what it was of in the other: but the same general names will be applicable in this case as in that. If the beneficiaries, or persons whose interests are at stake upon the exercise of the trust, or any of them, are liable to sustain a prejudice, resulting from the quality of the person by whom it may be filled, such prejudice must result from the one or the other of two causes: 1. From a person's having the possession of it who ought not to have it: or 2. From a person's not having it who ought: whether it be a benefit or burthen to the possessor, is a circumstance that to this purpose makes no difference. In the first of these cases the offences from which the prejudice takes its rise are those of usurpation of trust, wrongful attribution of trust, and wrongful imposition of trust: in the latter, wrongful non-investment of trust, wrongful interception of trust, wrongful divestment of trust, wrongful abdication of trust, and wrongful detrectation of trust.

So much for the offences which concern the existence or possession of a trust: those which concern the exercise of the functions that belong to it may be thus conceived. You are in possession of a trust: the time then for your acting in it must, on any given occasion, (neglecting, for simplicity's sake, the then present instant) be either past or yet to come. If past, your conduct on that occasion must have been either conformable to the purposes for which the trust was instituted, or unconformable: if conformable, there has been no mischief in the case: if unconformable, the fault has been either in yourself alone, or in some other person, or in both: in as far as it has lain in yourself, it has consisted either in your not doing something which you ought to do, in which case it may be styled negative breach of trust; or in your doing something which you ought not to do: if in the doing something which you ought not to do, the party to whom the prejudice has accrued is either the same for whose benefit the trust was instituted, or some other party at large: in the former of these cases, the offence may be styled positive breach of trust; in the other, abuse of trust.
40
 In as far as the fault lies in another person, the offence on his part may be styled disturbance of trust. Supposing the time for your acting in the trust to be yet to come, the effect of any act which tends to render your conduct unconformable to the purposes of the trust, may be either to render it actually and eventually unconformable, or to produce a chance of its being so. In the former of these cases, it can do no otherwise than take one or other of the shapes that have just been mentioned. In the latter case, the blame must lie either in yourself alone, or in some other person, or in both together, as before. If in another person, the acts whereby he may tend to render your conduct unconformable, must be exercised either on yourself, or on other objects at large. If exercised on yourself, the influence they possess must either be such as operates immediately on your body, or such as operates immediately on your mind. In the latter case, again, the tendency of them must be to deprive you either of the knowledge, or of the power, or of the inclination,
41
 which would be necessary to your maintaining such a conduct as shall be conformable to the purposes in question. If they be such, of which the tendency is to deprive you of the inclination in question, it must be by applying to your will the force of some seducing motive.
42
 Lastly, This motive must be either of the coercive, or of the alluring kind; in other words, it must present itself either in the shape of a mischief or of an advantage. Now in none of all the cases that have been mentioned, except the last, does the offence receive any new denomination; according to the event it is either a disturbance of trust, or an abortive attempt to be guilty of that offence. In this last it is termed bribery; and it is that particular species of it which may be termed active bribery, or bribe-giving. In this case, to consider the matter on your part, either you accept of the bribe, or you do not: if not, and you do not afterwards commit, or go about to commit, either a breach or an abuse of trust, there is no offence, on your part, in the case: if you do accept it, whether you eventually do or do not commit the breach or the abuse which it is the bribe-giver's intention you should commit, you at any rate commit an offence which is also termed bribery: and which, for distinction sake, may be termed passive bribery, or bribe-taking.
43
 As to any farther distinctions, they will depend upon the nature of the particular sort of trust in question, and therefore belong not to the present place. And thus we have thirteen sub-divisions of offences against trust: viz. 1. Wrongful non-investment of trust. 2. Wrongful interception of trust. 3. Wrongful divestment of trust. 4. Usurpation of trust. 5. Wrongful investment or attribution of trust. 6. Wrongful abdication of trust. 7. Wrongful detrectation of trust. 8. Wrongful imposition of trust. 9. Negative breach of trust. 10. Positive breach of trust. 11. Abuse of trust. 12. Disturbance of trust. 13. Bribery.

 From what has been said, it appears that there cannot be any other offences, on the part of a trustee, by which a beneficiary can receive on any particular occasion any assignable specific prejudice. One sort of acts, however, there are by which a trustee may be put in some danger of receiving a prejudice, although neither the nature of the prejudice, nor the occasion on which he is in danger of receiving it, should be assignable. These can be no other than such acts, whatever they may be, as dispose the trustee to be acted upon by a given bribe with greater effect than any with which he could otherwise be acted upon: or in other words, which place him in such circumstances as have a tendency to increase the quantum of his sensibility to the action of any motive of the sort in question.
44
 Of these acts, there seem to be no others, that will admit of a description applicable to all places and times alike, than acts of prodigality on the part of the trustee. But in acts of this nature the prejudice to the beneficiary is contingent only and unliquidated; while the prejudice to the trustee himself is certain and liquidated. If therefore on any occasion it should be found advisable to treat it on the footing of an offence, it will find its place more naturally in the class of self-regarding ones.

 As to the subdivisions of offences against trust, these are perfectly analogous to those of offences by falsehood. The trust may be private, semi-public, or public: it may concern property, person, reputation, or condition; or any two or more of those articles at a time: as will be more particularly explained in another place. Here too the offence, in running over the ground occupied by the three prior classes, will in some instances change its name, while in others it will not.

 Lastly, if it be asked, What sort of relation there subsists between falsehoods on one hand, and offences concerning trust on the other hand; the answer is, they are altogether disparate. Falsehood is a circumstance that may enter into the composition of any sort of offence, those concerning trust, as well as any other: in some as an accidental, in others as an essential instrument. Breach or abuse of trust are circumstances which, in the character of accidental concomitants, may enter into the composition of any other offences (those against falsehood included) besides those to which they respectively give name. Continue reading: Chapter XVI, Part 2.

Chapter XVI (Sections 3-4): DIVISION OF OFFENCES
1
 (continued)
&sect; 3.
Genera of Class 
 Returning now to class the first, let us pursue the distribution a step farther, and branch out the several divisions of that class, as above exhibited, into their respective genera, that is, into such minuter divisions as are capable of being characterised by denominations of which a great part are already current among the people.
45
 In this place the analysis must stop. To apply it in the same regular form to any of the other classes seems scarcely practicable: to semi-public, as also to public offences, on account of the interference of local circumstances: to self-regarding ones, on account of the necessity it would create of deciding prematurely upon points which may appear liable to controversy: to offences by falsehood, and offences against trust, on account of the dependence there is between this class and the three former. What remains to be done in this way, with reference to these four classes, will require discussion, and will therefore be introduced with more propriety in the body of the work, than in a preliminary part, of which the business is only to draw outlines.

 An act, by which the happiness of an individual is disturbed, is either simple in its effects or complex. It may be styled simple in its effects, when it affects him in one only of the articles or points in which his interest, as we have seen, is liable to be affected: complex, when it affects him in several of those points at once. Such as are simple in their effects must of course be first considered.

 In a simple way, that is in one way at a time, a man's happiness is liable to be disturbed either 1. By actions referring to his own person itself; or 2. By actions referring to such external objects on which his happiness is more or less dependent. As to his own person, it is composed of two different parts, or reputed parts, his body and his mind. Acts which exert a pernicious influence on his person, whether it be on the corporeal or on the mental part of it, will operate thereon either immediately, and without affecting his will, or mediately, through the intervention of that faculty: viz. by means of the influence which they cause his will to exercise over his body. If with the intervention of his will, it must be by mental coercion: that is, by causing him to will to maintain, and thence actually to maintain, a certain conduct which it is disagreeable, or in any other way pernicious, to him to maintain. This conduct may either be positive or negative:
46
 when positive, the coercion is styled compulsion or constraint: when negative, restraint. Now the way in which the coercion is disagreeable to him, may be by producing either pain of body, or only pain of mind. If pain of body is produced by it, the offence will come as well under this as under other denominations, which we shall come to presently. Moreover, the conduct which a man, by means of the coercion, is forced to maintain, will be determined either specifically and originally, by the determination of the particular acts themselves which he is forced to perform or to abstain from, or generally and incidentally, by means of his being forced to be or not to be in such or such a place. But if he is prevented from being in one place, he is confined thereby to another. For the whole surface of the earth, like the surface of any greater or lesser body, may be conceived to be divided into two, as well as into any other number of parts or spots. If the spot then, which he is confined to, be smaller than the spot which he is excluded from, his condition may be called confinement: if larger, banishment.
47
 Whether an act, the effect of which is to exert a pernicious influence on the person of him who suffers by it operates with or without the intervention of an act of his will, the mischief it produces will either be mortal or not mortal. If not mortal, it will either be reparable, that is temporary, or irreparable, that is perpetual. If reparable, the mischievous act may be termed a simple corporal injury; if irreparable, an irreparable corporal injury. Lastly, a pain that a man experiences in his mind will either be a pain of actual sufferance, or a pain of apprehension. If a pain of apprehension, either the offender himself is represented as intending to bear a part in the production of it, or he is not. In the former case the offence may be styled menacement: in the latter case, as also where the pain is a pain of actual sufferance, a simple mental injury. And thus we have nine genera or kinds of personal injuries; which, when ranged in the order most commodious for examination, will stand as follows; viz. 1. Simple corporal injuries. 2. Irreparable corporal injuries. 3. Simple injurious restrainment. 4. Simple injurious compulsion.
48
 5. Wrongful confinement. 6. Wrongful banishment. 7. Wrongful homicide. 8. Wrongful menacement.
49
 9. Simple mental injuries.
50

 We come now to offences against reputation merely. These require but few distinctions. In point of reputation there is but one way of suffering, which is by losing a portion of the good-will of others. Now, in respect of the good-will which others bear you, you may be a loser in either of two ways: 1. By the manner in which you are thought to behave yourself; and 2. By the manner in which others behave, or are thought to behave, towards you. To cause people to think that you yourself have so behaved, as to have been guilty of any of those acts which cause a man to possess less than he did before of the good-will of the community, is what may be styled defamation. But such is the constitution of human nature, and such the force of prejudice, that a man merely by manifesting his own want of good-will towards you, though ever so unjust in itself, and ever so unlawfully expressed, may in a manner force others to withdraw from you a part of theirs. When he does this by words, or by such actions as have no other effect than in as far as they stand in the place of words, the offence may be styled vilification. When it is done by such actions as, besides their having this effect, are injuries to the person, the offence may be styled a personal insult: if it has got the length of reaching the body, a corporal insult: if it stopped short before it reached that length, it may be styled insulting menacement. And thus we have two genera or kinds of offences against reputation merely; to wit, 1. Defamation: and, 2. Vilification, or Revilement.
51
 As to corporal insults, and insulting menacement, they belong to the compound title of offences against person and reputation both together.

 If the property of one man suffers by the delinquency of another, such property either was in trust with the offender, or it was not: if it was in trust, the offence is a breach of trust, and of whatever nature it may be in other respects, may be styled dissipation in breach of trust, or dissipation of property in trust. This is a particular case: the opposite one is the more common: in such case the several ways in which property may, by possibility, become the object of an offence, may be thus conceived. Offences against property, of whatever kind it be, may be distinguished, as hath been already intimated,
52
 into such as concern the legal possession of it, or right to it, and such as concern only the enjoyment of it, or, what is the same thing, the exercise of that right. Under the former of these heads come, as hath been already intimated,
53
 the several offences of wrongful non-investment, wrongful interception, wrongful divestment, usurpation, and wrongful attribution. When in the commission of any of these offences a falsehood has served as an instrument, and that, as it is commonly called, a wilful, or as it might more properly be termed, an advised
54
 one, the epithet fraudulent may be prefixed to the name of the offence, or substituted in the room of the word wrongful. The circumstance of fraudulency then may serve to characterise a particular species, comprisable under each of those generic heads: in like manner the circumstance of force, of which more a little farther on, may serve to characterize another. With respect to wrongful interception in particular, the investitive event by which the title to the thing in question should have accrued to you, and for want of which such title is, through the delinquency of the offender, as it were, intercepted, is either an act of his own, expressing it as his will, that you should be considered by the law as the person who is legally in possession of it, or it is any other event at large: in the former case, if the thing, of which you should have been put into possession, is a sum of money to a certain amount, the offence is that which has received the name of insolvency; which branch of delinquency, in consideration of the importance and extent of it, may be treated on the footing of a distinct genus of itself.
55

Next, with regard to such of the offences against property as concern only the enjoyment of the object in question. This object must be either a service, or set of services,
56
 which should have been rendered by some person, or else an article belonging to the class of things. In the former ease, the offence may be styled wrongful withholding of services.
57
 In the latter case it may admit of farther modifications, which may be thus conceived: When any object which you have had the physical occupation or enjoyment of, ceases, in any degree, in consequence of the act of another man, and without any change made in so much of that power as depends upon the intrinsic physical condition of your person, to be subject to that power; this cessation is either owing to change in the intrinsic condition of the thing itself, or in its exterior situation with respect to you, that is, to its being situated out of your reach. In the former case, the nature of the change is either such as to put it out of your power to make any use of it at all, in which case the thing is said to be destroyed, and the offence whereby it is so treated may be termed wrongful destruction: or such only as to render the uses it is capable of being put to of less value than before, in which case it is said to be damaged, or to have sustained damage, and the offence may be termed wrongful endamagement. Moreover, in as far as the value which a thing is of to you is considered as being liable to be in some degree impaired, by any act on the part of any other person exercised upon that thing, although on a given occasion no perceptible damage should ensue, the exercise of any such act is commonly treated on the footing of an offence, which may be termed wrongful using or occupation.

If the cause of the thing's failing in its capacity of being of use to you, lies in the exterior situation of it with relation to you, the offence may be styled wrongful detainment.
58
 Wrongful detainment, or detention, during any given period of time, may either be accompanied with the intention of detaining the thing for ever (that is for an indefinite time), or not: if it be, and if it be accompanied at the same time with the intention of not being amenable to law for what is done, it seems to answer to the idea commonly annexed to the word embezzlement, an offence which is commonly accompanied with breach of trust.
59
 In the case of wrongful occupation, the physical faculty of occupying may have been obtained with or without the assistance or consent of the proprietor, or other person appearing to have a right to afford such assistance or consent. If without such assistance or consent, and the occupation be accompanied with the intention of detaining the thing for ever, together with the intention of not being amenable to law for what is done, the offence seems to answer to the idea commonly annexed to the word theft or stealing. If in the same circumstances a force is put upon the body of any person who uses, or appears to be disposed to use, any endeavours to prevent the act, this seems to be one of the cases in which the offence is generally understood to come under the name of robbery.

If the physical faculty in question was obtained with the assistance or consent of a proprietor or other person above spoken of, and still the occupation of the thing is an offence, it may have been either because the assistance or consent was not fairly or because it was not freely obtained. If not fairly obtained, it was obtained by falsehood, which, if advised, is in such a case termed fraud: and the offence, if accompanied with the intention of not being amenable to law, may be termed fraudulent obtainment or defraudment.
60
 If not freely obtained, it was obtained by force: to wit, either by a force put upon the body, which has been already mentioned, or by a force put upon the mind. If by a force put upon the mind, or in other words, by the application of coercive motives,
61
 it must be by producing the apprehension of some evil: which evil, if the act is an offence, must be some evil to which on the occasion in question the one person has no right to expose the other. This is one case in which, if the offence be accompanied with the intention of detaining the thing for ever, whether it be or be not accompanied with the intention of not being amenable to law, it seems to agree with the idea of what is commonly meant by extortion. Now the part a man takes in exposing another to the evil in question, must be either a positive or a negative part. In the former case, again, the evil must either be present or distant. In the case then where the assistance or consent is obtained by a force put upon the body, or where, if by a force put upon the mind, the part taken in the exposing a man to the apprehension of the evil is positive, the evil present, and the object of it his person, and if at any rate the extortion, thus applied, be accompanied with the intention of not being amenable to law, it seems to agree with the remaining case of what goes under the name of robbery.

As to dissipation in breach of trust, this, when productive of a pecuniary profit to the trustee, seems to be one species of what is commonly meant by peculation. Another, and the only remaining one, seems to consist in acts of occupation exercised by the trustee upon the things which are the objects of the fiduciary property, for his own benefit, and to the damage of the beneficiary. As to robbery, this offence, by the manner in which the assistance or consent is obtained, becomes an offence against property and person at the same time. Dissipation in breach of trust, and peculation, may perhaps be more commodiously treated of under the head of offences against trust.
62
 After these exceptions, we have thirteen genera or principal kinds of offences against property, which, when ranged in the order most commodious for examination, may stand as follows, viz. 1. Wrongful non-investment of property. 2. Wrongful interception of property. 3. Wrongful divestment of property. 4. Usurpation of property. 5. Wrongful investment of property. 6. Wrongful withholding of services. 7. Wrongful destruction or endamagement. 8. Wrongful occupation. 9. Wrongful detainment. 10. Embezzlement. 11. Theft. 12. Defraudment. 13. Extortion.
63

We proceed now to consider offences which are complex in their effects. Regularly, indeed, we should come to offences against condition; but it will be more convenient to speak first of offences by which a man's interest is affected in two of the preceding points at once.

 First, then, with regard to offences which affect person and reputation together. When any man, by a mode of treatment which affects the person, injures the reputation of another, his end and purpose must have been either his own immediate pleasure, or that sort of reflected pleasure, which in certain circumstances may be reaped from the suffering of another. Now the only immediate pleasure worth regarding, which any one can reap from the person of another, and which at the same time is capable of affecting the reputation of the latter, is the pleasure of the sexual appetite.
64
 This pleasure, then, if reaped at all, must have been reaped either against the consent of the party, or with consent. If with consent, the consent must have been obtained either freely and fairly both, or freely but not fairly, or else not even freely; in which case the fairness is out of the question. If the consent be altogether wanting, the offence is called rape: if not fairly obtained, seduction simply: if not freely, it may be called forcible seduction. In any case, either the offence has gone the length of consummation, or has stopped short of that period; if it has gone that length, it takes one or other of the names just mentioned: if not, it may be included alike in all cases under the denomination of a simple lascivious injury. Lastly, to take the case where a man injuring you in your reputation, by proceedings that regard your person, does it for the sake of that sort of pleasure which will sometimes result from the contemplation of another's pain. Under these circumstances either the offence has actually gone the length of a corporal injury, or it has rested in menacement: in the first case it may be styled a corporal insult; in the other, it may come under the name of insulting menacement. And thus we have six genera, or kind of offences, against person and reputation together; which, when ranged in the order most commodious for consideration, will stand thus: 1. Corporal insults. 2. Insulting menacement. 3. Seduction. 4. Rape. 5. Forcible seduction. 6. Simple lascivious injuries.
65

 Secondly, with respect to those which affect person and property together. That a force put upon the person of a man may be among the means by which the title to property may be unlawfully taken away or acquired, has been already stated.
66
 A force of this sort then is a circumstance which may accompany the offences of wrongful interception, wrongful divestment, usurpation, and wrongful investment. But in these cases the intervention of this circumstance does not happen to have given any new denomination to the offence.
67
 In all or any of these cases, however, by prefixing the epithet forcible, we may have so many names of offences, which may either be considered as constituting so many species of the genera belonging to the division of offences against property, or as so many genera belonging to the division now before us. Among the offences that concern the enjoyment of the thing, the case is the same with wrongful destruction and wrongful endamagement; as also with wrongful occupation and wrongful detainment. As to the offence of wrongful occupation, it is only in the case where the thing occupied belongs to the class of immovables, that, when accompanied by the kind of force in question, has obtained a particular name which is in common use: in this case it is called forcible entry: forcible detainment, as applied also to immovables, but only to immovables, has obtained, among lawyers at least, the name of forcible detainer.
68
 And thus we may distinguish ten genera, or kinds of offences, against person and property together, which, omitting for conciseness' sake the epithet wrongful, will stand thus: 1. Forcible interception of property. 2. Forcible divestment of property. 3. Forcible usurpation. 4. Forcible investment. 5. Forcible destruction or endamagement. 6. Forcible occupation of movables. 7. Forcible entry. 8. Forcible detainment of movables. 9. Forcible detainment of immovables. 10. Robbery.
69

 We come now to offences against condition. A man's condition or station in life is constituted by the legal relation he bears to the persons who are about him; that is, as we have already had occasion to show,
70
 by duties, which, by being imposed on one side, give birth to rights or powers on the other. These relations, it is evident, may be almost infinitely diversified. Some means, however, may be found of circumscribing the field within which the varieties of them are displayed. In the first place, they must either be such as are capable of displaying themselves within the circle of a private family, or such as require a larger space. The conditions constituted by the former sort of relations may be styled domestic: those constituted by the latter, civil.

 As to domestic conditions, the legal relations by which they are constituted may be distinguished into 1. Such as are superadded to relations purely natural: and 2. Such as, without any such natural basis, subsist purely by institution. By relations purely natural, I mean those which may be said to subsist between certain persons in virtue of the concern which they themselves, or certain other persons, have had in the process which is necessary to the continuance of the species. These relations may be distinguished, in the first place, into contiguous and uncontiguous. The uncontiguous subsist through the intervention of such as are contiguous. The contiguous may be distinguished, in the first place, into connubial, and post-connubial.
71
 Those which may be termed connubial are two: 1. That which the male bears towards the female: 2. That which the female bears to the male.
72
 The post-connubial are either productive or derivative. The productive is that which the male and female above-mentioned bear each of them towards the children who are the immediate fruit of their union; this is termed the relation of parentality. Now as the parents must be, so the children may be, of different sexes. Accordingly the relation of parentality may be distinguished into four species: 1. That which a father bears to his son: this is termed paternity. 2. That which a father bears to his daughter: this also is termed paternity. 3. That which a mother bears to her son: this is called maternity. 4. That which a mother bears to her daughter: this also is termed maternity. Uncontiguous natural relations may be distinguished into immediate and remote. Such as are immediate, are what one person bears to another in consequence of their bearing each of them one simple relation to some third person. Thus the paternal grandfather is related to the paternal grandson by means of the two different kinds, which together they bear to the father: the brother on the father's side, to the brother, by means of the two relations of the same kind, which together they bear to the father. In the same manner we might proceed to find places in the system for the infinitely diversified relations which result from the combinations that may be formed by mixing together the several sorts of relationships by ascent, relationships by descent, collateral relationships, and relationships by affinity: which latter, when the union between the two parties through whom the affinity takes place is sanctioned by matrimonial solemnities, are termed relationships by marriage. But this, as it would be a most intricate and tedious task, so happily is it, for the present purpose, an unnecessary one. The only natural relations to which it will be necessary to pay any particular attention, are those which, when sanctioned by law, give birth to the conditions of husband and wife, the two relations comprised under the head of parentality, and the corresponding relations comprised under the head of filiality or filiation.

What then are the relations of a legal kind which can be superinduced upon the above-mentioned natural relations? They must be such as it is the nature of law to give birth to and establish. But the relations which subsist purely by institution exhaust, as we shall see, the whole stock of relationships which it is in the nature of the law to give birth to and establish. The relations then which can be superinduced upon those which are purely natural, cannot be in themselves any other than what are of the number of those which subsist purely by institution: so that all the difference there can be between a legal relation of the one sort, and a legal relation of the other sort, is, that in the former case the circumstance which gave birth to the natural relation serves as a mark to indicate where the legal relation is to fix: in the latter case, the place where the legal relation is to attach is determined not by that circumstance but by some other. From these considerations it will appear manifestly enough, that for treating of the several sorts of conditions, as well natural as purely conventional, in the most commodious order, it will be necessary to give the precedence to the latter. Proceeding throughout upon the same principle, we shall all along give the priority, not to those which are first by nature, but to those which are most simple in point of description. There is no other way of avoiding perpetual anticipations and repetitions.

 We come now to consider the domestic or family relations, which are purely of legal institution. It is to these in effect, that both kinds of domestic conditions, considered as the work of law, are indebted for their origin. When the law, no matter for what purpose, takes upon itself to operate, in a matter in which it has not operated before, it can only be by imposing obligation.
73
 Now when a legal obligation is imposed on any man, there are but two ways in which it can in the first instance be enforced. The one is by giving the power of enforcing it to the party in whose favour it is imposed: the other is by reserving that power to certain third persons, who, in virtue of their possessing it, are styled ministers of justice. In the first case, the party favoured is said to possess not only a right as against the party obliged, but also a power over him: in the second case, a right only, uncorroborated by power. In the first case, the party favoured may be styled a superior, and as they are both members of the same family, a domestic superior, with reference to the party obliged: who, in the same case, may be styled a domestic inferior, with reference to the party favoured. Now in point of possibility. it is evident, that domestic conditions, or a kind of fictitious possession analogous to domestic conditions, might have been looked upon as constituted, as well by rights alone, without powers on either side, as by powers. But in point of utility
74
 it does not seem expedient: and in point of fact, probably owing to the invariable perception which men must have had of the inexpediency, no such conditions seem ever to have been constituted by such feeble bands. Of the legal relationships then, which are capable of being made to subsist within the circle of a family, there remain those only in which the obligation is enforced by power. Now then, wherever any such power is conferred, the end or purpose for which it was conferred (unless the legislator can be supposed to act without a motive) must have been the producing of a benefit to somebody: in other words, it must have been conferred for the sake of somebody. The person then, for whose sake it is conferred, must either be one of the two parties just mentioned, or a third party: if one of these two, it must be either the superior or the inferior. If the superior, such superior is commonly called a master; and the inferior is termed his servant: and the power may be termed a beneficial one. If it be for the sake of the inferior that the power is established, the superior is termed a guardian; and the inferior his ward: and the power, being thereby coupled with a trust, may be termed a fiduciary one. If for the sake of a third party, the superior may be termed a superintendent; and the inferior his subordinate. This third party will either be an assignable individual or set of individuals, or a set of unassignable individuals. In this latter case the trust is either a public or a semi-public one: and the condition which it constitutes is not of the domestic, but of the civil kind. In the former case, this third party or principal, as he may be termed, either has a beneficial power over the superintendent, or he has not: if he has, the superintendent is his servant, and consequently so also is the subordinate: if not, the superintendent is the master of the subordinate; and all the advantage which the principal has over his superintendent, it that of possessing a set of rights, uncorroborated by power; and therefore, as we have seen,
75
 not fit to constitute a condition of the domestic kind. But be the condition what it may which is constituted by these rights, of what nature can the obligations be, to which the superintendent is capable of being subjected by means of them? They are neither more nor less than those which a man is capable of being subjected to by powers. It follows, therefore, that the functions of a principal and his superintendent coincide with those of a master and his servant; and consequently that the offences relative to the two former conditions will coincide with the offences relative to the two latter.

 Offences to which the condition of a master, like any other kind of condition, is exposed, may, as hath been already intimated
76
 be distinguished into such as concern the existence of the condition itself, and such as concern the performance of the functions of it, while subsisting. First then, with regard to such as affect its existence. It is obvious enough that the services of one man may be a benefit to another: the condition of a master may therefore be a beneficial one. It stands exposed, therefore, to the offences of wrongful non-investment, wrongful interception, usurpation, wrongful investment, and wrongful divestment. But how should it stand exposed to the offences of wrongful abdication, wrongful detrectation, and wrongful imposition? Certainly it cannot of itself; for services, when a man has the power of exacting them or not, as he thinks fit, can never be a burthen. But if to the powers, by which the condition of a master is constituted, the law thinks fit to annex any obligation on the part of the master; for instance, that of affording maintenance, or giving wages, to the servant, or paying money to anybody else; it is evident that in virtue of such obligation the condition may become a burthen. In this case, however, the condition possessed by the master will not properly speaking, be the pure and simple condition of a master: it will be a kind of complex object, resolvable into the beneficial condition of a master, and the burthensome obligation which is annexed to it. Still however, if the nature of the obligation lies within a narrow compass, and does not, in the manner of that which constitutes a trust, interfere with the exercise of those powers by which the condition of the superior is constituted, the latter, notwithstanding this foreign mixture, will still retain the name of mastership.
77
 In this case therefore, but not otherwise, the condition of a master may stand exposed to the offences of wrongful abdication, wrongful detrectation, and wrongful imposition. Next as to the behaviour of persons with reference to this condition, while considered as subsisting. In virtue of its being a benefit, it is exposed to disturbance. This disturbance will either be the offence of a stranger, or the offence of the servant himself. Where it is the offence of a stranger, and is committed by taking the person of the servant, in circumstances in which the taking of an object belonging to the class of things would be an act of theft, or (what is scarcely worth distinguishing from theft) an act of embezzlement: it may be termed servant-stealing. Where it is the offence of the servant himself, it is styled breach of duty. Now the most flagrant species of breach of duty, and that which includes indeed every other, is that which consists in the servant's withdrawing himself from the place in which the duty should be performed. This species of breach of duty is termed elopement. Again, in virtue of the power belonging to this condition, it is liable, on the part of the master to abuse. But this power is not coupled with a trust. The condition of a master is therefore not exposed to any offence which is analogous to breach of trust. Lastly, on account of its being exposed to abuse, it may be conceived to stand, in point of possibility, exposed to bribery. But considering how few, and how insignificant, the persons are who are liable to be subject to the power here in question, this is an offence which, on account of the want of temptation, there will seldom be any example of in practice. We may therefore reckon thirteen sorts of offences to which the condition of a master is exposed; viz. 1. Wrongful non-investment of mastership. 2. Wrongful interception of mastership. 3. Wrongful divestment of mastership. 4. Usurpation of mastership. 5. Wrongful investment of mastership. 6. Wrongful abdication of mastership. 7. Wrongful detrectation of mastership. 8. Wrongful imposition of mastership. 9. Abuse of mastership. 10. Disturbance of mastership. 11. Breach of duty in servants. 12. Elopement of servants. 13. Servant-stealing.

 As to the power by which the condition of a master is constituted, this may be either limited or unlimited. When it is altogether unlimited, the condition of the servant is styled pure slavery. But as the rules of language are as far as can be conceived from being steady on this head, the term slavery is commonly made use of wherever the limitations prescribed to the power of the master are looked upon as inconsiderable. Whenever any such limitation is prescribed, a kind of fictitious entity is thereby created, and, in quality of an incorporeal object of possession, is bestowed upon the servant: this object is of the class of those which are called rights: and in the present case is termed, in a more particular manner, a liberty; and sometimes a privilege, an immunity, or an exemption. Now those limitations on the one hand, and these liberties on the other, may, it is evident, be as various as the acts (positive or negative) which the master may or may not have the power of obliging the servant to submit to or to perform. Correspondent then to the infinitude of these liberties, is the infinitude of the modifications which the condition of mastership (or, as it is more common to say in such a case, that of servitude) admits of. These modifications, it is evident, may, in different countries, be infinitely diversified. In different countries, therefore, the offences characterised by the above names will, if specifically considered, admit of very different descriptions. If there be a spot upon the earth so wretched as to exhibit the spectacle of pure and absolutely unlimited slavery, on that spot there will be no such thing as any abuse of mastership; which means neither more nor less than that no abuse of mastership will there be treated on the footing of an offence. As to the question, Whether any, and what, modes of servitude ought to be established or kept on foot? this is a question, the solution of which belongs to the civil branch of the art of legislation.

 Next, with regard to the offences that may concern the condition of a servant. It might seem at first sight, that a condition of this kind could not have a spark of benefit belonging to it: that it could not be attended with any other consequences than such as rendered it a mere burthen. But a burthen itself may be a benefit, in comparison of a greater burthen. Conceive a man's situation then to be such, that he must, at any rate, be in a state of pure slavery. Still may it be material to him, and highly material, who the person is whom he has for his master. A state of slavery then, under one master, may be a beneficial state to him, in comparison with a state of slavery under another master. The condition of a servant then is exposed to the several offences to which a condition, in virtue of its being a beneficial one, is exposed.
78
 More than this, where the power of the master is limited, and the limitations annexed to it, and thence the liberties of the servant, are considerable, the servitude may even be positively eligible. For amongst those limitations may be such as are sufficient to enable the servant to possess property of his own: being capable then of possessing property of his own, he may be capable of receiving it from his master: in short, he may receive wages, or other emoluments, from his master; and the benefit resulting from these wages may be so considerable as to outweigh the burthen of the servitude, and, by that means, render that condition more beneficial upon the whole, and more eligible, than that of one who is not in any respect under the control of any such person as a master. Accordingly, by these means the condition of the servant may be so eligible, that his entrance into it, and his continuance in it, may have been altogether the result of his own choice. That the nature of the two conditions may be the more clearly understood, it may be of use to show the sort of correspondency there is between the offences which affect the existence of the one, and those which affect the existence of the other. That this correspondency cannot but be very intimate is obvious at first sight. It is not, however, that a given offence in the former catalogue coincides with an offence of the same name in the latter catalogue: usurpation of servantship with usurpation of mastership, for example. But the case is, that an offence of one denomination in the one catalogue coincides with an offence of a different denomination in the other catalogue. Nor is the coincidence constant and certain: but liable to contingencies, as we shall see. First, then, wrongful non-investment of the condition of a servant, if it be the offence of one who should have been the master, coincides with wrongful detrectation of mastership: if it be the offence of a third person, it involves in it non-investment of mastership, which, provided the mastership be in the eyes of him who should have been master a beneficial thing, but not otherwise, is wrongful. 2. Wrongful interception of the condition of a servant, if it be the offence of him who should have been master, coincides with wrongful detrectation of mastership: if it be the offence of a third person, and the mastership be a beneficial thing, it involves in it wrongful interception of mastership. 3. Wrongful divestment of servantship, if it be the offence of the master, but not otherwise, coincides with wrongful abdication of mastership: if it be the offence of a stranger, it involves in it divestment of mastership, which, in as far as the mastership is a beneficial thing, is wrongful. 4. Usurpation of servantship coincides necessarily with wrongful imposition of mastership: it will be apt to involve in it wrongful divestment of mastership: but this only in the case where the usurper, previously to the usurpation, was in a state of servitude under some other master. 5. Wrongful investment of servantship (the servantship being considered as a beneficial thing) coincides with imposition of mastership; which, if in the eyes of the pretended master the mastership should chance to be a burthen, will be wrongful. 6. Wrongful abdication of servantship coincides with wrongful divestment of mastership. 7. Wrongful detrectation of servantship, with wrongful non-investment of mastership. 8. Wrongful imposition of servantship, if it be the offence of the pretended master, coincides with usurpation of mastership: if it be the offence of a stranger, it involves in it imposition of mastership, which, if in the eyes of the pretended master the mastership should be a burthen, will be wrongful. As to abuse of mastership, disturbance of mastership, breach of duty in servants, elopement of servants, and servant-stealing, these are offences which, without any change of denomination, bear equal relation to both conditions. And thus we may reckon thirteen sorts of offences to which the condition of a servant stands exposed: viz. 1. Wrongful non-investment of servantship. 2. Wrongful interception of servantship. 3. Wrongful divestment of servantship. 4. Usurpation of servantship. 5. Wrongful investment of servantship. 6. Wrongful abdication of servantship. 7. Wrongful detrectation of servantship. 8. Wrongful imposition of servantship. 9. Abuse of mastership. 10. Disturbance of mastership. 11. Breach of duty in servants. 12. Elopement of servants. 13. Servant-stealing.

 We now come to the offences to which the condition of a guardian is exposed. A guardian is one who is invested with power over another, living within the compass of the same family, and called a ward; the power being to be exercised for the benefit of the ward. Now then, what are the cases in which it can be for the benefit of one man, that another, living within the compass of the same family, should exercise power over him? Consider either of the parties by himself, and suppose him, in point of understanding, to be on a level with the other, it seems evident enough that no such cases can ever exist.
79
 To the production of happiness on the part of any given person (in like manner as to the production of any other effect which is the result of human agency) three things it is necessary should concur: knowledge, inclination, and physical power. Now as there is no man who is so sure of being inclined, on all occasions, to promote your happiness as you yourself are, so neither is there any man who upon the whole can have had so good opportunities as you must have had of knowing what is most conducive to that purpose. For who should know so well as you do what it is that gives you pain or pleasure?
80
 Moreover, as to power, it is manifest that no superiority in this respect, on the part of a stranger, could, for a constancy, make up for so great a deficiency as he must lie under in respect of two such material points as knowledge and inclination. If then there be a case where it can be for the advantage of one man to be under the power of another, it must be on account of some palpable and very considerable deficiency, on the part of the former, in point of intellects, or (which is the same thing in other words) in point of knowledge or understanding. Now there are two cases in which such palpable deficiency is known to take place. These are, 1. Where a man's intellect is not yet arrived at that state in which it is capable of directing his own inclination in the pursuit of happiness: this is the case of infancy.
81
 2. Where by some particular known or unknown circumstance his intellect has either never arrived at that state, or having arrived at it has fallen from it: which is the case of insanity.

By what means then is it to be ascertained whether a man's intellect is in that state or no? For exhibiting the quantity of sensible heat in a human body we have a very tolerable sort of instrument, the thermometer; but for exhibiting the quantity of intelligence, we have no such instrument. It is evident, therefore, that the line which separates the quantity of intelligence which is sufficient for the purposes of self-government from that which is not sufficient, must be, in a great measure, arbitrary. Where the insufficiency is the result of want of age, the sufficient quantity of intelligence, be it what it may, does not accrue to all at the same period of their lives. It becomes therefore necessary for legislators to cut the gordian knot, and fix upon a particular period, at which and not before, truly or not, every person whatever shall be deemed, as far as depends upon age, to be in possession of this sufficient quantity.
82
 In this case then a line is drawn which may be the same for every man, and in the description of which, such as it is, whatever persons are concerned may be certain of agreeing: the circumstance of time affording a mark by which the line in question may be traced with the utmost degree of nicety. On the other hand, where the insufficiency is the result of insanity, there is not even this resource: so that here the legislator has no other expedient than to appoint some particular person or persons to give a particular determination of the question, in every instance in which it occurs, according to his or their particular and arbitrary discretion. Arbitrary enough it must be at any rate, since the only way in which it can be exercised is by considering whether the share of intelligence possessed by the individual in question does or does not come up to the loose and indeterminate idea which persons so appointed may chance to entertain with respect to the quantity which is deemed sufficient.

 The line then being drawn, or supposed to be so, it is expedient to a man who cannot, with safety to himself, be left in his own power, that he should be placed in the power of another. How long then should he remain so? Just so long as his inability is supposed to continue: that is, in the case of infancy, till he arrives at that period at which the law deems him to be of full age: in the case of insanity, till he be of sound mind and understanding. Now it is evident, that this period, in the case of infancy, may not arrive for a considerable time: and in the case of insanity, perhaps never. The duration of the power belonging to this trust must therefore, in the one case, be very considerable; in the other case, indefinite.

 The next point to consider, is what may be the extent of it? for as to what ought to be, that is a matter to be settled, not in a general analytical sketch, but in a particular and circumstantial dissertation. By possibility, then, this power may possess any extent that can be imagined: it may extend to any acts which, physically speaking, it may be in the power of the ward to perform himself, or be the object of if exercised by the guardian. Conceive the power, for a moment, to stand upon this footing: the condition of the ward stands now exactly upon a footing with pure slavery. Add the obligation by which the power is turned into a trust: the limits of the power are now very considerably narrowed. What then is the purport of this obligation? Of what nature is the course of conduct it prescribes? It is such a course of conduct as shall be best calculated for procuring to the ward the greatest quantity of happiness which his faculties, and the circumstances he is in, will admit of: saving always, in the first place, the regard which the guardian is permitted to show to his own happiness; and, in the second place, that which he is obliged, as well as permitted, to show to that of other men. This is, in fact, no other than that course of conduct which the ward, did he but know how, ought, in point of prudence, to maintain of himself: so that the business of the former is to govern the latter precisely in the manner in which this latter ought to govern himself. Now to instruct each individual in what manner to govern his own conduct in the details of life, is the particular business of private ethics: to instruct individuals in what manner to govern the conduct of those whose happiness, during nonage, is committed to their charge, is the business of the art of private education. The details, therefore, of the rules to be given for that purpose, any more than the acts which are capable of being committed in violation of those rules, belong not to the art of legislation: since, as will be seen more particularly hereafter,
83
 such details could not, with any chance of advantage, be provided for by the legislator. Some general outlines might indeed be drawn by his authority: and, in point of fact, some are in every civilized state. But such regulations, it is evident, must be liable to great variation: in the first place, according to the infinite diversity of civil conditions which a man may stand invested with in any given state: in the next place, according to the diversity of local circumstances that may influence the nature of the conditions which may chance to be established in different states. On this account, the offences which would be constituted by such regulations could not be comprised under any concise and settled denominations, capable of a permanent and extensive application. No place, therefore, can be allotted to them here.

 By what has been said, we are the better prepared for taking an account of the offences to which the condition in question stands exposed. Guardianship being a private trust, is of course exposed to those offences, and no others, by which a private trust is liable to be affected. Some of them, however, on account of the special quality of the trust, will admit of some further particularity of description. In the first place, breach of this species of trust may be termed mismanagement of guardianship: in the second place, of whatever nature the duties are which are capable of being annexed to this condition, it must often happen, that in order to fulfil them, it is necessary the guardian should be at a certain particular place. Mismanagement of guardianship, when it consists in the not being, on the occasion in question, at the place in question, may be termed desertion of guardianship. Thirdly, It is manifest enough, that the object which the guardian ought to propose to himself, in the exercise of the powers to which those duties are annexed, is to procure for the ward the greatest quantity of happiness which can be procured for him, consistently with the regard which is due to the other interests that have been mentioned: for this is the object which the ward would have proposed to himself, and might and ought to have been allowed to propose to himself, had he been capable of governing his own conduct. Now, in order to procure this happiness, it is necessary that he should possess a certain power over the objects on the use of which such happiness depends. These objects are either the person of the ward himself, or other objects that are extraneous to him. These other objects are either things or persons. As to things, then, objects of this class, insofar as a man's happiness depends upon the use of them, are styled his property. The case is the same with the services of any persons over whom he may happen to possess a beneficial power, or to whose services he may happen to possess a beneficial right. Now when property of any kind, which is in trust, suffers by the delinquency of him with whom it is in trust, such offence, of whatever nature it is in other respects, may be styled dissipation in breach of trust: and if it be attended with a profit to the trustee, it may be styled peculation.
84
 Fourthly, For one person to exercise a power of any kind over another, it is necessary that the latter should either perform certain acts, upon being commanded so to do by the former, or at least should suffer certain acts to be exercised upon himself. In this respect a ward must stand upon the footing of a servant: and the condition of a ward must, in this respect, stand exposed to the same offences to which that of a servant stands exposed: that is, on the part of a stranger, to disturbance, which, in particular circumstances, will amount to theft: on the part of the ward, to breach of duty: which, in particular circumstances, may be effected by elopement. Fifthly, There does not seem to be any offence concerning guardianship that corresponds to abuse of trust: I mean in the sense to which the last-mentioned denomination has been here confined.
85
 The reason is, that guardianship, being a trust of a private nature, does not, as such, confer upon the trustee any power, either over the persons or over the property of any party, other than the beneficiary himself. If by accident it confers on the trustee a power over any persons whose services constitute a part of the property of the beneficiary, the trustee becomes thereby, in certain respects, the master of such servants.
86
 Sixthly, Bribery also is a sort of offence to which, in this case, there is not commonly much temptation. It is an offence, however, which by possibility is capable of taking this direction: and must therefore be aggregated to the number of the offences to which the condition of a guardian stands exposed. And thus we have in all seventeen of these offences: viz. 1. Wrongful non-investment of guardianship. 2. Wrongful interception of guardianship. 3. Wrongful divestment of guardianship. 4. Usurpation of guardianship. 5. Wrongful investment of guardianship. 6. Wrongful abdication of guardianship. 7. Detrectation of guardianship. 8. Wrongful imposition of guardianship. 9. Mismanagement of guardianship. 10. Desertion of guardianship. 11. Dissipation in prejudice of wardship. 12. Peculation in prejudice of wardship. 13. Disturbance of guardianship. 14. Breach of duty to guardians. 15. Elopement from guardians. 16. Ward-stealing. 17. Bribery in prejudice of wardship.

 Next, with regard to offences to which the condition of wardship is exposed. Those which first affect the existence of the condition itself are as follows: 1. Wrongful non-investment of the condition of a ward. This, if it be the offence of one who should have been guardian, coincides with wrongful detrectation of guardianship: if it be the offence of a third person, it involves in it non-investment of guardianship, which, provided the guardianship is, in the eyes of him who should have been guardian, a desirable thing, is wrongful. 2. Wrongful interception of wardship. This, if it be the offence of him who should have been guardian, coincides with wrongful detrectation of guardianship: if it be the offence of a third person, it involves in it interception of guardianship, which, provided the guardianship is, in the eyes of him who should have been guardian, a desirable thing, is wrongful. 3. Wrongful divestment of wardship. This, if it be the offence of the guardian, but not otherwise, coincides with wrongful abdication of guardianship: if it be the offence of a third person, it involves in it divestment of guardianship, which, if the guardianship is, in the eyes of the guardian, a desirable thing, is wrongful. 4. Usurpation of the condition of a ward: an offence not very likely to be committed. This coincides at any rate with wrongful imposition of guardianship; and if the usurper were already under the guardianship of another guardian, it will involve in it wrongful divestment of such guardianship.
87
 5. Wrongful investment of wardship (the wardship being considered as a beneficial thing): this coincides with imposition of guardianship, which, if in the eyes of the pretended guardian the guardianship should be a burthen, will be wrongful. 6. Wrongful abdication of wardship. This coincides with wrongful divestment of guardianship. 7. Wrongful detrectation of wardship. This coincides with wrongful interception of guardianship. 8. Wrongful imposition of wardship. This, if the offender be the pretended guardian, coincides with usurpation of guardianship: if a stranger, it involves in it wrongful imposition of guardianship. As to such of the offences relative to this condition, as concern the consequences of it while subsisting, they are of such a nature that, without any change of denomination, they belong equally to the condition of a guardian and that of a ward. We may therefore reckon seventeen sorts of offences relative to the condition of a ward: 1. Wrongful non-investment of wardship. 2. Wrongful interception of wardship. 3. Wrongful divestment of wardship. 4. Usurpation of wardship. 5. Wrongful investment of wardship. 6. Wrongful abdication of wardship. 7. Wrongful detrectation of wardship. 8. Wrongful imposition of wardship. 9. Mismanagement of guardianship. 10. Desertion of guardianship. 11. Dissipation in prejudice of wardship. 12. Peculation in prejudice of wardship. 13. Disturbance of guardianship. 14. Breach of duty to guardians. 15. Elopement from guardians. 16. Ward-stealing. 17. Bribery in prejudice of wardship.

 We come now to the offences to which the condition of a parent stands exposed: and first, with regard to those by which the very existence of the condition is affected. On this occasion, in order to see the more clearly into the subject, it will be necessary to distinguish between the natural relationship, and the legal relationship which is superinduced as it were upon the natural one. The natural one being constituted by a particular event, which, either on account of its being already past, or on some other account, is equally out of the power of the law neither is, nor can be made, the subject of an offence. Is a man your father? It is not any offence of mine that can make you not his son. Is he not your father? It is not any offence of mine that can render him so. But although he does in fact bear that relation to you, I, by an offence of mine, may perhaps so manage matters, that he shall not be thought to bear it: which, with respect to any legal advantages which either he or you could derive from such relationship, will be the same thing as if he did not. In the capacity of a witness, I may cause the judges to believe that he is not your father, and to decree accordingly: or, in the capacity of a judge, I may myself decree him not to be your father. Leaving then the purely natural relationship as an object equally out of the reach of justice and injustice, the legal condition, it is evident, will stand exposed to the same offences, neither more nor less, as every other condition, that is capable of being either beneficial or burthensome, stands exposed to. Next, with regard to the exercise of the functions belonging to this condition, considered as still subsisting. In parentality there must be two persons concerned, the father and the mother. The condition of a parent includes, therefore, two conditions; that of a father, and that of a mother, with respect to such or such a child. Now it is evident, that between these two parties, whatever beneficiary powers, and other rights, as also whatever obligations, are annexed to the condition of a parent, may be shared in any proportions that can be imagined. But if in these several objects of legal creation, each of these two parties have severally a share, and if the interests of all these parties are in any degree provided for, it is evident that each of the parents will stand, with relation to the child, in two several capacities: that of a master, and that of a guardian. The condition of a parent then, in as far as it is the work of law, may be considered as a complex condition, compounded of that of a guardian, and that of a master. To the parent then, in quality of guardian, results a set of duties, involving, as necessary to the discharge of them, certain powers: to the child, in the character of a ward, a set of rights corresponding to the parent's duties, and a set of duties corresponding to his powers. To the parent again, in quality of master, a set of beneficiary powers, without any other necessary limitation (so long as they last) than what is annexed to them by the duties incumbent on him in quality of a guardian: to the child, in the character of a servant, a set of duties corresponding to the parent's beneficiary powers, and without any other necessary limitation (so long as they last) than what is annexed to them by the rights which belong to the child in his capacity of ward. The condition of a parent will therefore be exposed to all the offences to which either that of a guardian or that of a master are exposed: and, as each of the parents will partake, more or less, of both those characters, the offences to which the two conditions are exposed may be nominally, as they will be substantially, the same. Taking them then all together, the offences to which the condition of a parent is exposed will stand as follows: 1. Wrongful non-investment of parentality.
88
 2. Wrongful interception of parentality. 3. Wrongful divestment of parentality. 4. Usurpation of parentality. 5. Wrongful investment of parentality. 6. Wrongful abdication of parentality. 7. Wrongful detrectation of parentality. 8. Wrongful imposition of parentality. 9. Mismanagement of parental guardianship. 10. Desertion of parental guardianship. 11. Dissipation in prejudice of filial wardship. 12. Peculation in prejudice of filial wardship. 13. Abuse of parental powers. 14. Disturbance of parental guardianship. 15. Breach of duty to parents. 16. Elopement from parents. 17. Child-stealing. 18. Bribery in prejudice of filial wardship.

 Next with regard to the offences to which the filial condition,
89
 the condition of a son or daughter, stands exposed. The principles to be pursued in the investigation of offences of this description have already been sufficiently developed. It will be sufficient, therefore, to enumerate them without further discussion. The only peculiarities by which offences relative to the condition in question stand distinguished from the offences relative to all the preceding conditions, depend upon this one circumstance; viz. that it is certain every one must have had a father and a mother: at the same time that it is not certain that every one must have had a master, a servant, a guardian, or a ward. It will be observed all along, that where a person, from whom, if alive, the benefit would be taken, or on whom the burthen would be imposed, be dead, so much of the mischief is extinct along with the object of the offence. There still, however, remains so much of the mischief as depends upon the advantage or disadvantage which might accrue to persons related, or supposed to be related, in the several remoter degrees, to him in question. The catalogue then of these offences stands as follows: 1. Wrongful non-investment of filiation. This, if it be the offence of him or her who should have been recognized as the parent, coincides with wrongful detrectation of parentality: if it be the offence of a third person, it involves in it non-investment of parentality, which, provided the parentality is, in the eyes of him or her who should have been recognised as the parent, a desirable thing, is wrongful. 2. Wrongful interception of filiation. This, if it be the offence of him or her who should have been recognised as the parent, coincides with wrongful detrectation of parentality: if it be the offence of a third person, it involves in it interception of parentality, which, provided the parentality is, in the eyes of him or her who should have been recognized as parent, a desirable thing, is wrongful. 3. Wrongful divestment of filiation. This, if it be the offence of him or her who should be recognized as parent, coincides with wrongful abdication of parentality: if it be the offence of a third person, it involves in it divestment of parentality; to wit, of paternity, or of maternity, or of both; which, if the parentality is, in the eyes of him or her who should be recognized as parent, a desirable thing, are respectively wrongful. 4. Usurpation of filiation. This coincides with wrongful imposition of parentality; to wit, either of paternity, or of maternity, or of both: and necessarily involves in it divestment of parentality, which, if the parentality thus divested were, in the eyes of him or her who are thus divested of it, a desirable thing, is wrongful. 5. Wrongful investment of filiation: (the filiation being considered as a beneficial thing.) This coincides with imposition of parentality, which, if in the eyes of the pretended father or mother the parentality should be an undesirable thing, will be wrongful. 6. Wrongful abdication of filiation. This necessarily coincides with wrongful divestment of parentality; it also is apt to involve in it wrongful imposition of parentality; though not necessarily either to the advantage or to the prejudice of any certain person. For if a man, supposed at first to be your son, appears afterwards not to be yours, it is certain indeed that he is the son of some other man, but it may not appear who that other man is. 7. Wrongful detrectation of filiation. This coincides with wrongful noninvestment or wrongful interception of parentality. 8. Wrongful imposition of filiation. This, if it be the offence of the pretended parent, coincides necessarily with usurpation of parentality: if it be the offence of a third person, it necessarily involves imposition of parentality; as also divestment of parentality: either or both of which, according to the circumstance above mentioned, may or may not be wrongful. 9. Mismanagement of parental guardianship. 10. Desertion of parental guardianship. 11. Dissipation in prejudice of filial wardship. 12. Peculation in prejudice of filial wardship. 13. Abuse of parental power. 14. Disturbance of parental guardianship. 15. Breach of duty to parents. 16. Elopement from parents. 17. Child-stealing. 18. Bribery in prejudice of parental guardianship.

 We shall now be able to apply ourselves with some advantage to the examination of the several offences to which the marital condition, or condition of a husband, stands exposed. A husband is a man, between whom and a certain woman, who in this case is called his wife, there subsists a legal obligation for the purpose of their living together, and in particular for the purpose of a sexual intercourse to be carried on between them. This obligation will naturally be considered in four points of view: 1. In respect of its commencement. 2. In respect of the placing of it. 3. In respect of the nature of it. 4. In respect of its duration. First then, it is evident, that in point of possibility, one method of commencement is as conceivable as another: the time of its commencement might have been marked by one sort of event (by one sort of signal, as it may here be called) as well as by another. But in practice the signal has usually been, as in point of utility it ought constantly to be, a contract entered into by the parties: that is, a set of signs, pitched upon by the law, as expressive of their mutual consent, to take upon them this condition. Secondly, and thirdly, with regard to the placing of the obligations which are the result of the contract, it is evident that they must rest either solely on one side, or mutually on both. On the first supposition, the condition is not to be distinguished from pure slavery. In this case, either the wife must be the slave of the husband, or the husband of the wife. The first of these suppositions has perhaps never been exemplified; the opposing influence of physical causes being too universal to have ever been surmounted: the latter seems to have been exemplified but too often; perhaps among the first Romans; at any rate, in many barbarous nations. Thirdly, with regard to the nature of the obligations. If they are not suffered to rest all on one side, certain rights are thereby given to the other. There must, therefore, be rights on both sides. Now, where there are mutual rights possessed by two persons, as against each other, either there are powers annexed to those rights, or not. But the persons in question are, by the supposition, to live together: in which case we have shown,
90
 that it is not only expedient, but in a manner necessary, that on one side there should be powers. Now it is only on one side that powers can be: for suppose them on both sides, and they destroy one another. The question is then, In which of the parties these powers shall be lodged? we have shown, that on the principle of utility they ought to be lodged in the husband. The powers then which subsist being lodged in the husband, the next question is, Shall the interest of one party only, or of both, be consulted in the exercise of them? it is evident, that on the principle of utility the interests of both ought alike to be consulted: since in two persons taken together, more happiness is producible than in one. This being the case, it is manifest, that the legal relation which the husband will bear to the wife will be a complex one: compounded of that of master and that of guardian.

 The offences then to which the condition of a husband of will be exposed, will be the sum of those to which the two conditions of master and guardian are exposed. Thus far the condition of a husband, with respect to the general outlines of it, stands upon the same footing as that of a parent. But there are certain reciprocal services, which being the main subject of the matrimonial contract, constitute the essence of the two matrimonial relations, and which neither a master nor guardian, as such, nor a parent, at any rate, have usually been permitted to receive. These must of course have been distinguished from the indiscriminate train of services at large which the husband in his character of master is empowered to exact, and of those which in his character of guardian he is bound to render. Being thus distinguished, the offences relative to the two conditions have, in many instances, in as far as they have reference to these peculiar services, acquired particular denominations. In the first place, with regard to the contract, from the celebration of which the legal condition dates its existence. It is obvious that in point of possibility, this contract might, on the part of either sex, subsist with respect to several persons of the other sex at the same time: the husband might have any number of wives: the wife might have any number of husbands: the husband might enter into the contract with a number of wives at the same time: or, if with only one at a time, he might reserve to himself a right of engaging in a similar contract with any number, or with only such or such a number of other women afterwards, during the continuance of each former contract. This latter accordingly is the footing upon which, as is well known, marriage is and has been established in many extensive countries: particularly in all those which profess the Mahometan religion. In point of possibility, it is evident that the like liberty might be reserved on the part of the wife: though in point of practice no examples of such an arrangement seem ever to have occurred. Which of all these arrangements is in point of utility the most expedient, is a question which would require too much discussion to answer in the course of an analytical process like the present, and which belongs indeed to the civil branch of legislation, rather than to the penal.
91
 In Christian countries, the solemnization of any such contract is made to exclude the solemnization of any subsequent one during the continuance of a former: and the solemnization of any such subsequent contract is accordingly treated as an offence, under the name of Polygamy. Polygamy then is at any rate, on the part of the man, a particular modification of that offence which may be styled usurpation of the condition of a husband. As to its other effects, they will be different, according as it was the man only, or the woman only, or both, that were in a state of matrimony at the time of the commission of the offence. If the man only, then his offence involves in it pro tanto that of wrongful divestment of the condition of a wife, in prejudice of his prior wife.
92
 If the woman only, then it involves in it pro tanto that of wrongful divestment of the condition of a husband, in prejudice of her prior husband. If both were already married, it of course involves both the wrongful divestments which have just been mentioned. And on the other hand also, the converse of all this may be observed with regard to polygamy on the part of the woman. Secondly, As the engaging not to enter into any subsequent engagement of the like kind during the continuance of the first, is one of the conditions on which the law lends its sanction to the first; so another is, the inserting as one of the articles of this engagement an undertaking not to render to, or accept from, any other person the services which form the characteristic object of it: the rendering or acceptance of any such services is accordingly treated as an offence, under the name of adultery: under which name is also comprised the offence of the stranger, who, in the commission of the above offence, is the necessary accomplice. Thirdly, Disturbing either of the parties to this engagement, in the possession of these characteristic services, may, in like manner, be distinguished from the offence of disturbing them in the enjoyment of the miscellaneous advantages derivable from the same condition; and on whichever side the blame rests, whether that of the party, or that of a third person, may be termed wrongful withholding of connubial services. And thus we have one-and-twenty sorts of offences to which, as the law stands at present in Christian countries, the condition of a husband stands exposed: viz. 1. Wrongful non-investment of the condition of a husband. 2. Wrongful interception of the condition of a husband. 3. Wrongful divestment of the condition of a husband. 4. Usurpation of the condition of a husband. 5. Polygamy. 6. Wrongful investment of the condition of a husband. 7. Wrongful abdication of the condition of a husband. 8. Wrongful detrectation of the condition of a husband. 9. Wrongful imposition of the condition of a husband. 10. Mismanagement of marital guardianship. 11. Desertion of marital guardianship. 12. Dissipation in prejudice of matrimonial wardship. 13. Peculation in prejudice of matrimonial wardship. 14. Abuse of marital power. 15. Disturbance of marital guardianship. 16. Wrongful withholding of connubial services. 17. Adultery. 18. Breach of duty to husbands. 19. Elopement from husbands. 20. Wife-stealing. 21. Bribery in prejudice of marital guardianship.
93

 Next with regard to the offences to which the condition of a wife stands exposed. From the patterns that have been exhibited already, the coincidences and associations that take place between the offences that concern the existence of this condition and those which concern the existence of the condition of a husband, may easily enough be apprehended without farther repetitions. The catalogue of those now under consideration will be precisely the same in every article as the catalogue last exhibited.

 Thus much for the several sorts of offences relative to the several sorts of domestic conditions: those which are constituted by such natural relations as are contiguous being included. There remain those which are uncontiguous: of which, after so much as has been said of the others, it will naturally be expected that some notice should be taken. These, however, do not afford any of that matter which is necessary to constitute a condition. In point of fact, no power seems ever to be annexed to any of them. A grandfather, perhaps, may be called by the law to take upon him the guardianship of his orphan grandson: but then the power he has belongs to him not as grandfather, but as guardian. In point of possibility, indeed, power might be annexed to these relations, just as it might to any other. But still no new sort of domestic condition would result from it: since it has been shown that there can be no others, that, being constituted by power, shall be distinct from those which have been already mentioned. Such as they are, however, they have this in common with the before-mentioned relations, that they are capable of importing either benefit or burthen: they therefore stand exposed to the several offences whereby those or any other relations are liable to be affected in point of existence. It might be expected, therefore, that in virtue of these offences, they should be added to the list of the relations which are liable to be objects of delinquency. But the fact is, that they already stand included in it: and although not expressly named, yet as effectually as if they were. On the one hand, it is only by affecting such or such a contiguous relation that any offence affecting uncontiguous relations can take place. On the other hand, neither can any offence affecting the existence of the contiguous relations be committed, without affecting the existence of an indefinite multitude of such as are uncontiguous. A false witness comes, and causes it to be believed that you are the son of a woman, who, in truth, is not your mother. What follows? An endless tribe of other false persuasions—that you are the grandson of the father and of the mother of this supposed mother: that you are the son of some husband of hers, or, at least, of some man with whom she has cohabited: the grandson of his father and his mother; and so on: the brother of their other children, if they have any: the brother-in-law of the husbands and wives of those children, if married: the uncle of the children of those children: and so on.—On the other hand, that you are not the son of your real mother, nor of your real father: that you are not the grandson of either of your real grandfathers or grandmothers; and so on without end: all which persuasions result from, and are included in, the one original false persuasion of your being the son of this your pretended mother.

It should seem, therefore, at first sight, that none of the offences against these uncontiguous relations could ever come expressly into question: for by the same rule that one ought, so it might seem ought a thousand others: the offences against the uncontiguous being merged as it were in those which affect the contiguous relations. So far, however, is this from being the case, that in speaking of an offence of this stamp, it is not uncommon to hear a great deal said of this or that uncontiguous relationship which it affects, at the same time that no notice at all shall be taken of any of those which are contiguous. How happens this? Because, to the uncontiguous relation are annexed perhaps certain remarkable advantages or disadvantages, while to all the intermediate relations none shall be annexed which are in comparison worth noticing. Suppose Antony or Lepidus to have contested the relationship of Octavius (afterwards Augustus) to Caius Julius Cæsar. How could it have been done? It could only have been by contesting, either Octavius's being the son of Atia, or Atia's being the daughter of Julia, or Julia's being the daughter of Lucius Julius Cæsar, or Lucius Julius Cæsar's being the father of Caius. But to have been the son of Atia, or the grandson of Julia, or the great grandson of Lucius Julius Cæsar, was, in comparison, of small importance. Those intervening relationships were, comparatively speaking, of no other use to him than in virtue of their being so many necessary links in the genealogical chain which connected him with the sovereign of the empire.

As to the advantages and disadvantages which may happen to be annexed to any of those uncontiguous relationships, we have seen already that no powers over the correlative person, nor any corresponding obligations, are of the number. Of what nature then can they be? They are, in truth, no other than what are the result either of local and accidental institutions, or of some spontaneous bias that has been taken by the moral sanction. It would, therefore, be to little purpose to attempt tracing them out a priori by any exhaustive process: all that can be done is, to pick up and lay together some of the principal articles in each catalogue by way of specimen. The advantages which a given relationship is apt to impart, seem to be referable chiefly to the following heads: 1. Chance of succession to the property, or a part of the property, of the correlative person. 2. Chance of pecuniary support, to be yielded by the correlative person, either by appointment of law, or by spontaneous donation. 3. Accession of legal rank; including any legal privileges which may happen to be annexed to it: such as capacity of holding such and such beneficial offices; exemption from such and such burthensome obligations; for instance, paying taxes, serving burthensome offices, &c. &c. 4. Accession of rank by courtesy; including the sort of reputation which is customarily and spontaneously annexed to distinguished birth and family alliance: whereon may depend the chance of advancement in the way of marriage, or in a thousand other ways less obvious. The disadvantages which a given relation is liable to impart, seem to be referable chiefly to the following heads: 1. Chance of being obliged, either by law, or by force of the moral sanction, to yield pecuniary support to the correlative party. 2. Loss of legal rank: including the legal disabilities, as well as the burthensome obligations, which the law is apt to annex, sometimes with injustice enough, to the lower stations. 3. Loss of rank by courtesy: including the loss of the advantages annexed by custom to such rank. 4. Incapacity of contracting matrimony with the correlative person, where the supposed consanguinity or affinity lies within the prohibited degrees.
94

 We come now to civil conditions: these, it may well be imagined, may be infinitely various: as various as the acts which a man may be either commanded or allowed, whether for his own benefit, or that of others, to abstain from or to perform. As many different denominations as there are of persons distinguished with a view to such commands and allowances (those denominations only excepted which relate to the conditions above spoken of under the name of domestic ones) so many civil conditions one might enumerate. Means however, more or less explicit, may be found out of circumscribing their infinitude.

What the materials are, if so they may be called, of which conditions, or any other kind of legal possession, can be made up, we have already seen: beneficial powers, fiduciary powers, beneficial rights, fiduciary rights, relative duties, absolute duties. But as many conditions as import a power or right of the fiduciary kind, as possessed by the person whose condition is in question, belong to the head of trusts. The catalogue of the offences to which these conditions are exposed, coincides therefore exactly with the catalogue of offences against trust: under which head they have been considered in a general point of view under the head of offences against trust: and such of them as are of a domestic nature, in a more particular manner in the character of offences against the several domestic conditions. Conditions constituted by such duties of the relative kind, as have for their counterparts trusts constituted by fiduciary powers, as well as rights on the side of the correlative party, and those of a private nature, have also been already discussed under the appellation of domestic conditions. The same observation may be applied to the conditions constituted by such powers of the beneficial kind over persons as are of a private nature: as also to the subordinate correlative conditions constituted by the duties corresponding to those rights and powers. As to absolute duties, there is no instance of a condition thus created, of which the institution is upon the principle of utility to be justified; unless the several religious conditions of the monastic kind should be allowed of as examples. There remain, as the only materials out of which the conditions which yet remain to be considered can be composed, conditions constituted by beneficial powers over things; conditions constituted by beneficial rights to things (that is, rights to powers over things) or by rights to those rights, and so on; conditions constituted by rights to services; and conditions constituted by the duties corresponding to those respective rights. Out of these are to be taken those of which the materials are the ingredients of the several modifications of property, the several conditions of proprietorship. These are the conditions, if such for a moment they may be styled, which having but here and there any specific names, are not commonly considered on the footing of conditions: so that the acts which, if such conditions were recognised might be considered as offences against those conditions, are not wont to be considered in any other light than that of offences against property.

Now the case is, as hath been already intimated,
95
 that of these civil conditions, those which are wont to be considered under that name, are not distinguished by any uniform and explicit line from those of which the materials are wont to be carried to the head of property: a set of rights shall, in one instance, be considered as constituting an article of property rather than a condition: while, in another instance, a set of rights of the same stamp is considered as constituting rather a condition than an article of property. This will probably be found to be the case in all languages: and the usage is different again in one language from what it is in another. From these causes it seems to be impracticable to subject the class of civil conditions to any exhaustive method: so that for making a complete collection of them there seems to be no other expedient than that of searching the language through for them, and taking them as they come. To exemplify this observation, it may be of use to lay open the structure as it were of two or three of the principal sorts or classes of conditions, comparing them with two or three articles of property which appear to be nearly of the same complexion: by this means the nature and generation, if one may so call it, of both these classes of ideal objects may be the more clearly understood.

The several sorts of civil conditions that are not fiduciary may all, or at least the greater part of them, be comprehended under the head of rank, or that of profession; the latter word being taken in its most extensive sense, so as to include not only what are called the liberal professions, but those also which are exercised by the several sorts of traders, artists, manufacturers, and other persons of whatsoever station, who are in the way of making a profit by their labour. Among ranks then, as well as professions, let us, for the sake of perspicuity, take for examples such articles as stand the clearest from any mixture of either fiduciary or beneficial power. The rank of knighthood is constituted, how? by prohibiting all other persons from performing certain acts, the performance of which is the symbol of the order, at the same time that the knight in question, and his companions, are permitted: for instance, to wear a ribbon of a certain colour in a certain manner: to call himself by a certain title: to use an armorial seal with a certain mark on it. By laying all persons but the knight under this prohibition, the law subjects them to a set of duties: and since from the discharge of these duties a benefit results to the person in whose favour they are created, to wit, the benefit of enjoying such a share of extraordinary reputation and respect as men are wont to yield to a person thus distinguished, to discharge them is to render him a service: and the duty being a duty of the negative class, a duty consisting in the performance of certain acts of the negative kind,
96
 the service is what may be called a service of forbearance. It appears then, that to generate this condition there must be two sorts of services: that which is the immediate cause of it, a service of the negative kind, to be rendered by the community at large: that which is the cause again of this service, a service of the positive kind, to be rendered by the law.

The condition of a professional man stands upon a narrower footing. To constitute this condition there needs nothing more than a permission given him on the part of the legislator to perform those acts, in the performance of which consists the exercise of his profession: to give or sell his advice or assistance in matters of law or physic: to give or sell his services as employed in the executing or overseeing of a manufacture or piece of work of such or such a kind: to sell a commodity of such or such a sort. Here then we see there is but one sort of service requisite; a service which may be merely of the negative kind, to be rendered by the law: the service of permitting him to exercise his profession: a service which, if there has been no prohibition laid on before, is rendered by simply forbearing to prohibit him.

Now the ideal objects, which in the cases above specified are said to be conferred upon a man by the services that are respectively in question, are in both cases not articles of property but conditions. By such a behaviour on the part of the law, as shall be the reverse of that whereby they were respectively produced, a man may be made to forfeit them: and what he is then said to forfeit is in neither case his property; but in one case, his rank or dignity: in the other case, his trade or his profession: and in both cases, his condition.

Other cases there are again in which the law, by a process of the same sort with that by which it constituted the former of the two above-mentioned conditions, confers on him an ideal object, which the laws of language have placed under the head of property. The law permits a man to sell books: that is, all sorts of books in general. Thus far all that it has done is to invest him with a condition: and this condition he would equally possess, although everybody else in the world were to sell books likewise. Let the law now take an active part in his favour, and prohibit all other persons from selling books of a certain description, he remaining at liberty to sell them as before. It therefore confers on him a sort of exclusive privilege or monopoly, which is called a copy-right. But by investing him with this right, it is not said to invest him with any new sort of condition: what it invests him with is spoken of as an article of property; to wit, of that sort of property which is termed incorporeal:
97
 and so on in the case of an engraving, a mechanical engine, a medicine; or, in short, of a saleable article of any other sort. Yet when it gave him an exclusive right of wearing a particular sort of ribbon, the object which it was then considered as conferring on him was not an article of property but a condition.

By forbearing to subject you to certain disadvantages, to which it subjects an alien, the law confers on you the condition of a natural-born subject: by subjecting him to them, it imposes on him the condition of an alien: by conferring on you certain privileges or rights, which it denies to a roturier, the law confers on you the condition of a gentilhomme; by forbearing to confer on him those privileges, it imposes on him the condition of a roturier.
98
 The rights, out of which the two advantageous conditions here exemplified are both of them as it were composed, have for their counterpart a sort of services of forbearance, rendered, as we have seen, not by private individuals, but by the law itself. As to the duties which it creates in rendering you these services, they are to be considered as duties imposed by the legislator on the ministers of justice.

It may be observed, with regard to the greater part of the conditions here comprised under the general appellation of civil, that the relations corresponding to those by which they are respectively constituted, are not provided with appellatives. The relation which has a name, is that which is borne by the party favoured to the party bound: that which is borne by the party bound to the party favoured has not any. This is a circumstance that may help to distinguish them from those conditions which we have termed domestic. In the domestic conditions, if on the one side the party to whom the power is given is called a master; on the other side, the party over whom that power is given, the party who is the object of that power, is termed a servant. In the civil conditions this is not the case. On the one side, a man, in virtue of certain services of forbearance, which the rest of the community are bound to render him, is denominated a knight of such or such an order: but on the other side, these services do not bestow any particular denomination on the persons from whom such services are due. Another man, in virtue of the legislator's rendering that sort of negative service which consists in the not prohibiting him from exercising a trade, invests him at his option with the condition of a trader: it accordingly denominates him a farmer, a baker, a weaver, and so on: but the ministers of the law do not, in virtue of their rendering the man this sort of negative service, acquire for themselves any particular name. Suppose even that the trade you have the right of exercising happens to be the object of a monopoly, and that the legislator, besides rendering you himself those services which you derive from the permission he bestows on you, obliges other persons to render you those farther services which you receive from their forbearing to follow the same trade; yet neither do they, in virtue of their being thus bound, acquire any particular name.

After what has been said of the nature of the several sorts of civil conditions that have names, the offences to which they are exposed may, without much difficulty, be imagined. Taken by itself, every condition which is thus constituted by a permission granted to the possessor, is of course of a beneficial nature: it is, therefore, exposed to all those offences to which the possession of a benefit is exposed. But either on account of a man's being obliged to persevere when once engaged in it, or on account of such other obligations as may stand annexed to the possession of it, or on account of the comparative degree of disrepute which may stand annexed to it by the moral sanction, it may by accident be a burthen: it is on this account liable to stand exposed to the offences to which, as hath been seen, every thing that partakes of the nature of a burthen stands exposed. As to any offences which may concern the exercise of the functions belonging to it, if it happens to have any duties annexed to it, such as those, for instance, which are constituted by regulations touching the exercise of a trade, it will stand exposed to so many breaches of duty; and lastly, whatsoever are the functions belonging to it, it will stand exposed at any rate to disturbance.

In the forming however of the catalogue of these offences, exactness is of the less consequence, inasmuch as an act, if it should happen not to be comprised in this catalogue, and yet is in any respect of a pernicious nature, will be sure to be found in some other division of the system of offences: if a baker sells bad bread for the price of good, it is a kind of fraud upon the buyer; and perhaps an injury of the simple corporal kind done to the health of an individual, or a neighbourhood: if a clothier sells bad cloth for good at home, it is a fraud; if to foreigners abroad, it may, over and above the fraud put upon the foreign purchaser, have pernicious effects perhaps in the prosperity of the trade at home, and become thereby an offence against the national wealth. So again with regard to disturbance: if a man be disturbed in the exercise of his trade, the offence will probably be a wrongful interception of the profit he might be presumed to have been in a way to make by it: and were it even to appear in any case that a man exercised a trade, or what is less unlikely, a liberal profession, without having profit in his view, the offence will still be reducible to the head of simple injurious restrainment, or simple injurious compulsion.

&sect; 4.
Advantages of the present method.
 A few words, for the purpose of giving a general view of the method of division here pursued, and of the advantages which it possesses, may have their use. The whole system of offences, we may observe, is branched out into five classes. In the three first, the subordinate divisions are taken from the same source; viz. from the consideration of the different points, in respect whereof the interest of an individual is exposed to suffer. By this uniformity, a considerable degree of light seems to be thrown upon the whole system; particularly upon the offences that come under the third class: objects which have never hitherto been brought into any sort of order. With regard to the fourth class, in settling the precedence between its several subordinate divisions, it seemed most natural and satisfactory to place those first, the connection whereof with the welfare of individuals seemed most obvious and immediate. The mischievous effects of those offences, which tend in an immediate way to deprive individuals of the protection provided for them against the attacks of one another, and of those which tend to bring down upon them the attacks of foreign assailants, seem alike obvious and palpable. The mischievous quality of such as tend to weaken the force that is provided to combat those attacks, but particularly the latter, though evident enough, is one link farther off in the chain of causes and effects. The ill effects of such offences as are of disservice only by diminishing the particular fund from whence that force is to be extracted, such effects, I say, though indisputable, are still more distant and out of sight. The same thing may be observed with regard to such as are mischievous only by affecting the universal fund. Offences against the sovereignty in general would not be mischievous, if offences of the several descriptions preceding were not mischievous. Nor in a temporal view are offences against religion mischievous, except in as far as, by removing, or weakening, or misapplying one of the three great incentives to virtue, and checks to vice, they tend to open the door to the several mischiefs, which it is the nature of all those other offences to produce. As to the fifth class, this, as hath already been observed, exhibits, at first view, an irregularity, which however seems to be unavoidable. But this irregularity is presently corrected, when the analysis returns back, as it does after a step or two, into the path from which the tyranny of language had forced it a while to deviate.

It was necessary that it should have two purposes in view: the one, to exhibit, upon a scale more or less minute, a systematical enumeration of the several possible modifications of delinquency, denominated or undenominated; the other, to find places in the list for such names of offences as were in current use: for the first purpose, nature was to set the law; for the other, custom. Had the nature of the things themselves been the only guide, every such difference in the manner of perpetration, and such only, should have served as a ground for a different denomination, as was attended with a difference in point of effect. This however of itself would never have been sufficient; for as on one hand the new language, which it would have been necessary to invent, would have been uncouth, and in a manner unintelligible: so on the other hand the names, which were before in current use, and which, in spite of all systems, good or bad, must have remained in current use, would have continued unexplained. To have adhered exclusively to the current language, would have been as bad on the other side; for in that case the catalogue of offences, when compared to that of the mischiefs that are capable of being produced, would have been altogether broken and uncomplete.

To reconcile these two objects, in as far as they seemed to be reconcilable, the following course has therefore been pursued. The logical whole, constituted by the sum total of possible offences, has been bisected in as many different directions as were necessary, and the process in each direction carried down to that stage at which the particular ideas thus divided found names in current use in readiness to receive them. At that period I have stopped; leaving any minuter distinctions to be enumerated in the body of the work, as so many species of the genus characterised by such or such a name. If in the course of any such process I came to a mode of conduct which, though it required to be taken notice of, and perhaps had actually been taken notice of, under all laws, in the character of an offence, had hitherto been expressed under different laws, by different circumlocutions, without ever having received any name capable of occupying the place of a substantive in a sentence, I have frequently ventured so far as to fabricate a new name for it, such an one as the idiom of the language, and the acquaintance I happened to have with it, would admit of. These names consisting in most instances, and that unavoidably, of two or three words brought together, in a language too which admits not, like the German and the Greek, of their being melted into one, can never be upon a par, in point of commodiousness, with those univocal appellatives which make part of the established stock.

In the choice of names in current use, care has been taken to avoid all such as have been grounded on local distinctions, ill founded perhaps in the nation in which they received their birth, and at any rate not applicable to the circumstances of other countries.

The analysis, as far as it goes, is as applicable to the legal concerns of one country as of another: and where, if it had descended into further details, it would have ceased to be so, there I have taken care always to stop: and thence it is that it has come to be so much more particular in the class of offences against individuals, than in any of the other classes. One use then of this arrangement, if it should be found to have been properly conducted, will be its serving to point out in what it is that the legal interests of all countries agree, and in what it is that they are liable to differ: how far a rule that is proper for one, will serve, and how far it will not serve, for another. That the legal interests of different ages and countries have nothing in common, and that they have every thing, are suppositions equally distant from the truth.
99

 A natural method, such as it hath been here attempted to exhibit, seems to possess four capital advantages; not to mention others of inferior note. In the first place, it affords such assistance to the apprehension and to the memory, as those faculties would in vain look for in any technical arrangement.
100
 That arrangement of the objects of any science may, it should seem, be termed a natural one, which takes such properties to characterise them by, as men in general are, by the common constitution of man's nature, independently of any accidental impressions they may have received from the influence of any local or other particular causes, accustomed to attend to: such, in a word, as naturally, that is readily and at first sight, engage, and firmly fix, the attention of any one to whom they have once been pointed out. Now by what other means should an object engage or fix a man's attention, unless by interesting him? and what circumstance belonging to any action can be more interesting, or rather what other circumstance belonging to it can be at all interesting to him, than that of the influence it promises to have on his own happiness, and the happiness of those who are about him? By what other mark then should he more easily find the place which any offence occupies in the system, or by what other clue should he more readily recall it?

 In the next place, it not only gives at first glance a general intimation of the nature of each division of offences, in as far as that nature is determined by some one characteristic property, but it gives room for a number of general propositions to be formed concerning the particular offences that come under that division, in such manner as to exhibit a variety of other properties that may belong to them in common. It gives room therefore, for the framing of a number of propositions concerning them, which, though very general, because predicated of a great number of articles, shall be as generally true.
101

 In the third place, it is so contrived, that the very place which any offence is made to occupy, suggests the reason of its being put there. It serves to indicate not only that such and such acts are made offences, but why they ought to be. By this means, while it addresses itself to the understanding, it recommends itself in some measure to the affections. By the intimation it gives of the nature and tendency of each obnoxious act, it accounts for, and in some measure vindicates, the treatment which it may be thought proper to bestow upon that act in the way of punishment. To the subject then it is a kind of perpetual apology: showing the necessity of every defalcation, which, for the security and prosperity of each individual, it is requisite to make from the liberty of every other. To the legislator it is a kind of perpetual lesson: serving at once as a corrective to his prejudices, and as a check upon his passions. Is there a mischief which has escaped him? in a natural arrangement, if at the same time an exhaustive one, he cannot fail to find it. Is he tempted ever to force innocence within the pale of guilt? the difficulty of finding a place for it advertises him of his error. Such are the uses of a map of universal delinquency, laid down upon the principle of utility: such the advantages, which the legislator as well as the subject may derive from it. Abide by it, and every thing that is arbitrary in legislation vanishes. An evil-intentioned or prejudiced legislator durst not look it in the face. He would proscribe it, and with reason: it would be a satire on his laws.

 In the fourth place, a natural arrangement, governed as it is by a principle which is recognised by all men, will serve alike for the jurisprudence of all nations. In a system of proposed law, framed in pursuance of such a method, the language will serve as a glossary by which all systems of positive law might be explained, while the matter serves as a standard by which they might be tried. Thus illustrated, the practice of every nation might be a lesson to every other: and mankind might carry on a mutual interchange of experiences and improvements as easily in this as in every other walk of science. If any one of these objects should in any degree be attained, the labour of this analysis, severe as it has been, will not have been thrown away.

&sect; 5.
Characters of the five classes
 It has been mentioned
102
 as an advantage possessed by this method, and not possessed by any other, that the objects comprised under it are cast into groups, to which a variety of propositions may be applied in common. A collection of these propositions, as applied to the several classes, may be considered as exhibiting the distinctive characters of each class. So many of these propositions as can be applied to the offences belonging to any given class, so many properties are they found to have in common: so many of these common properties as may respectively be attributed to them, so many properties may be set down to serve as characters of the class. A collection of these characters it may here be proper to exhibit. The more of them we can bring together, the more clearly and fully will the nature of the several classes, and of the offences they are composed of, be understood.

 Characters of Class 1; composed of PRIVATE offences, or offences against assignable individuals.

1. When arrived at their last stage (the stage of consummation
103
) they produce, all of them, a primary mischief as well as a secondary.
104
2. The individuals whom they affect in the first instance
105
 are constantly assignable. This extends to all; to attempts and preparations, as well as to such as have arrived at the stage of consummation.
106
3. Consequently they admit of compensation:
107
 in which they differ from the offences of all the other classes, as such.
4. They admit
108
 also of retaliation;
109
 in which also they differ from the offences of all the other classes.
5. There is always some person who has a natural and peculiar interest to prosecute them. In this they differ from self-regarding offences: also from semi-public and public ones; except in as far as the two latter may chance to involve a private mischief.
6. The mischief they produce is obvious: more so than that of semi-public offences: and still more so than that of self-regarding ones, or even public.
7. They are every where, and must ever be, obnoxious to the censure of the world: more so than semi-public offences as such; and still more so than public ones.
8. They are more constantly obnoxious to the censure of the world than self-regarding offences: and would be so universally, were it not for the influence of the two false principles; the principle of asceticism, and the principle of antipathy.
110
9. They are less apt than semi-public and public offences to require different descriptions
111
 in different states and countries: in which respect they are much upon a par with self-regarding ones.
10. By certain circumstances of aggravation, they are liable to be transformed into semi-public offences; and by certain others, into public.
11. There can be no ground for punishing them, until they can be proved to have occasioned, or to be about to occasion some particular mischief to some particular individual. In this they differ from semi-public offences, and from public.
12. In slight cases, compensation given to the individual affected by them may be a sufficient ground for remitting punishment: for if the primary mischief has not been sufficient to produce any alarm, the whole of the mischief may be cured by compensation. In this also they differ from semi-public offences, and from public ones.
 Characters of Class 2; composed of SEMI-PUBLIC offences, or offences affecting a whole subordinate class of persons.

1. As such, they produce no primary mischief. The mischief they produce consists of one or other or both branches of the secondary mischief produced by offences against individuals, without the primary.
2. In as far as they are to be considered as belonging to this class, the persons whom they affect in the first instance are not individually assignable.
3. They are apt, however, to involve or terminate in some primary mischief of the first order; which when they do, they advance into the first class, and become private offences.
4. They admit not, as such, of compensation.
5. Nor of retaliation.
6. As such, there is never any one particular individual whose exclusive interest it is to prosecute them: a circle of persons may, however, always be marked out, within which may be found some who have a greater interest to prosecute than any who are out of that circle have.
7. The mischief they produce is in general pretty obvious: not so much so indeed as that of private offences, but more so upon the whole than that of self-regarding and public ones.
8. They are rather less obnoxious to the censure of the world than private offences; but they are more so than public ones: they would also be more so than self-regarding ones, were it not for the influence of the two false principles, the principle of sympathy and antipathy, and that of asceticism.
9. They are more apt than private and self-regarding offences to require different descriptions in different countries: but less so than public ones.
10. There may be ground for punishing them before they have been proved to have occasioned, or to be about to occasion, mischief to any particular individual; which is not the case with private offences.
11. In no cases can satisfaction given to any particular individual affected by them be a sufficient ground for remitting punishment: for by such satisfaction it is but a part of the mischief of them that is cured. In this they differ from private offences; but agree with public.
 Characters of Class 3; consisting of SELF-REGARDING offences: offences against one's self.

1. In individual instances it will often be questionable, whether they are productive of any primary
112
 mischief at all: secondary, they produce none.
2. They affect not any other individuals, assignable or not assignable, except in as far as they affect the offender himself; unless by possibility in particular cases; and in a very slight and distant manner the whole state.
3. They admit not, therefore, of compensation.
4. Nor of retaliation.
5. No person has naturally any peculiar interest to prosecute them: except in as far as in virtue of some connection he may have with the offender, either in point of sympathy or of interest,
113
 a mischief of the derivative kind
114
 may happen to devolve upon him.
115
6. The mischief they produce is apt to be unobvious and in general more questionable than that of any of the other classes.
116
7. They are however apt, many of them, to be more obnoxious to the censure of the world than public offences; owing to the influence of the two false principles; the principle of asceticism, and the principle of antipathy. Some of them more even than semi-public, or even than private offence.
8. They are less apt than offences of any other class to require different descriptions in different states and countries.
117
9. Among the inducements
118
 to punish them, antipathy against the offender is apt to have a greater share than sympathy for the public.
10. The best plea for punishing them is founded on a faint probability there may be of their being productive of a mischief, which, if real, will place them in the class of public ones: chiefly in those divisions of it which are composed of offences against population, and offences against the national wealth.
 Characters of Class 4; consisting of PUBLIC offences, or offences against the state in general.

1. As such, they produce not any primary mischief; and the secondary mischief they produce, which consists frequently of danger without alarm, though great in value, is in specie very indeterminate.
2. The individuals whom they affect, in the first instance, are constantly unassignable; except in as far as by accident they happen to involve or terminate in such or such offences against individuals.
3. Consequently they admit not of compensation.
4. Nor of retaliation.
5. Nor is there any person who has naturally any particular interest to prosecute them; except in as far as they appear to affect the power, or in any other manner the private interest, of some person in authority.
6. The mischief they produce, as such, is comparatively unobvious; much more so than that of private offences, and more so likewise, than that of semi-public ones.
7. They are, as such, much less obnoxious to the censure of the world, than private offences; less even than semi-public, or even than self-regarding offences; unless in particular cases, through sympathy to certain persons in authority, whose private interests they may appear to affect.
8. They are more apt than any of the other classes to admit of different descriptions, in different states and countries.
9. They are constituted, in many cases, by some circumstances of aggravation superadded to a private offence: and therefore, in these cases, involve the mischief and exhibit the other characters belonging to both classes. They are however, even in such cases, properly enough ranked in the 4th class, inasmuch as the mischief they produce in virtue of the properties which aggregate them to that class, eclipses and swallows up that which they produce in virtue of those properties which aggregate them to the 1st.
10. There may be sufficient ground for punishing them, without their being proved to have occasioned, or to be about to occasion, any particular mischief to any particular individual. In this they differ from private offences, but agree with semi-public ones. Here, as in semi-public offences, the extent of the mischief makes up for the uncertainty of it.
11. In no case can satisfaction, given to any particular individual affected by them, be a sufficient ground for remitting punishment. In this they differ from private offences; but agree with semi-public.
 Characters of Class 5, or appendix: composed of MULTIFORM or ANOMALOUS offences; and containing offences by FALSEHOOD, and offences concerning TRUST.

1. Taken collectively, in the parcels marked out by their popular appellations, they are incapable of being aggregated to any systematical method of distribution, grounded upon the mischief of the offence.
2. They may, however, be thrown into sub-divisions, which may be aggregated to such a method of distribution.
3. These sub-divisions will naturally and readily rank under the divisions of the several preceding classes of this system.
4. Each of the two great divisions of this class spreads itself in that manner over all the preceding classes.
5. In some acts of this class, the distinguishing circumstance which constitutes the essential character of the offence, will in some instances enter necessarily, in the character of a criminative circumstance, into the constitution of the offence; insomuch that, without the intervention of this circumstance, no offence at all, of that denomination, can be committed.
119
 In other instances, the offence may subsist without it; and where it interferes, it comes in as an accidental independent circumstance, capable of constituting a ground of aggravation.
120
Chapter XVII: OF THE LIMITS OF THE PENAL BRANCH OF JURISPRUDENCE
&sect; 1.
Limits between Private Ethics and the Art of Legislation.
 So much for the division of offenses in general. Now an offense is an act prohibited, or (what comes to the same thing) an act of which the contrary is commanded, by the law: and what is it that the law can be employed in doing, besides prohibiting and commanding? It should seem then, according to this view of the matter, that were we to have settled what may be proper to be done with relation to offences, we should thereby have settled every thing that may be proper to be done in the way of law. Yet that branch which concerns the method of dealing with offences, and which is termed sometimes the criminal, sometimes the penal, branch, is universally understood to be but one out of two branches which compose the whole subject of the art of legislation; that which is termed the civil being the other.
121
 Between these two branches then, it is evident enough, there cannot but be a very intimate connection; so intimate is it indeed, that the limits between them are by no means easy to mark out. The case is the same in some degree between the whole business of legislation (civil and penal branches taken together) and that of private ethics. Of these several limits however it will be in a manner necessary to exhibit some idea: lest, on the one hand, we should seem to leave any part of the subject that does belong to as untouched, or, on the other hand, to deviate on any side into a track which does not belong to us.

In the course of this enquiry, that part of it I mean which concerns the limits between the civil and the penal branch of law, it will be necessary to settle a number of points, of which the connection with the main question might not at first sight be suspected. To ascertain what sort of a thing a law is; what the parts are that are to be found in it; what it must contain in order to be complete; what the connection is between that part of a body of laws which belongs to the subject of procedure and the rest of the law at large:—all these, it will be seen, are so many problems, which must be solved before any satisfactory answer can be given to the main question above mentioned.

Nor is this their only use: for it is evident enough, that the notion of a complete law must first be fixed, before the legislator can in any case know what it is he has to do, or when his work is done.

 Ethics at large may be defined, the art of directing men's actions to the production of the greatest possible quantity of happiness, on the part of those whose interest is in view.

 What then are the actions which it can be in a man's power to direct? They must be either his own actions, or those of other agents. Ethics, in as far as it is the art of directing a man's own actions, may be styled the art of self-government, or private ethics.

 What other agents then are there, which, at the same time that they are under the influence of man's direction, are susceptible of happiness. They are of two sorts: 1. Other human beings who are styled persons. 2. Other animals, which, on account of their interests having been neglected by the insensibility of the ancient jurists, stand degraded into the class of things.
122
 As to other human beings, the art of directing their actions to the above end is what we mean, or at least the only thing which, upon the principle of utility, we ought to mean, by the art of government: which, in as far as the measures it displays itself in are of a permanent nature, is generally distinguished by the name of legislation: as it is by that of administration, when they are of a temporary nature, determined by the occurrences of the day.

 Now human creatures, considered with respect to the maturity of their faculties, are either in an adult, or in a non-adult state. The art of government, in as far as it concerns the direction of the actions of persons in a non-adult state, may be termed the art of education. In as far as this business is entrusted with those who, in virtue of some private relationship, are in the main the best disposed to take upon them, and the best able to discharge, this office, it may be termed the art of private education: in as far as it is exercised by those whose province it is to superintend the conduct of the whole community, it may be termed the art of public education.

 As to ethics in general, a man's happiness will depend, in the first place, upon such parts of his behaviour as none but himself are interested in; in the next place, upon such parts of it as may affect the happiness of those about him. In as far as his happiness depends upon the first-mentioned part of his behaviour, it is said to depend upon his duty to himself. Ethics then, in as far as it is the art of directing a man's actions in this respect, may be termed the art of discharging one's duty to one's self: and the quality which a man manifests by the discharge of this branch of duty (if duty it is to be called) is that of prudence. In as far as his happiness, and that of any other person or persons whose interests are considered, depends upon such parts of his behaviour as may affect the interests of those about him, it may be said to depend upon his duty to others; or, to use a phrase now somewhat antiquated, his duty to his neighbour. Ethics then, in as far as it is the art of directing a man's actions in this respect, may be termed the art of discharging one's duty to one's neighbour. Now the happiness of one's neighbour may be consulted in two ways: 1. In a negative way, by forbearing to diminish it. 2. In a positive way, by studying to increase it. A man's duty to his neighbour is accordingly partly negative and partly positive: to discharge the negative branch of it, is probity: to discharge the positive branch, beneficence.

 It may here be asked, How it is that upon the principle of private ethics, legislation and religion out of the question, a man's happiness depends upon such parts of his conduct as affect, immediately at least, the happiness of no one but himself: this is as much as to ask, What motives (independent of such as legislation and religion may chance to furnish) can one man have to consult the happiness of another by what motives, or, which comes to the same thing, by what obligations, can he be bound to obey the dictates of probity and beneficence? In answer to this, it cannot but be admitted, that the only interests which a man at all times and upon all occasions is sure to find adequate motives for consulting, are his own. Notwithstanding this, there are no occasions in which a man has not some motives for consulting the happiness of other men. In the first place, he has, on all occasions, the purely social motive of sympathy or benevolence: in the next place, he has, on most occasions, the semi-social motives of love of amity and love of reputation. The motive of sympathy will act upon him with more or less effect, according to the bias of his sensibility:
123
 the two other motives, according to a variety of circumstances, principally according to the strength of his intellectual powers, the firmness and steadiness of his mind, the quantum of his moral sensibility, and the characters of the people he has to deal with.

 Now private ethics has happiness for its end: and legislation can have no other. Private ethics concerns every member, that is, the happiness and the actions of every member, of any community that can be proposed; and legislation can concern no more. Thus far, then, private ethics and the art of legislation go hand in hand. The end they have, or ought to have, in view, is of the same nature. The persons whose happiness they ought to have in view, as also the persons whose conduct they ought to be occupied in directing, are precisely the same. The very acts they ought to be conversant about, are even in a great measure the same. Where then lies the difference? In that the acts which they ought to be conversant about, though in a great measure, are not perfectly and throughout the same. There is no case in which a private man ought not to direct his own conduct to the production of his own happiness, and of that of his fellow-creatures: but there are cases in which the legislator ought not (in a direct way at least, and by means of punishment applied immediately to particular individual acts) to attempt to direct the conduct of the several other members of the community. Every act which promises to be beneficial upon the whole to the community (himself included) each individual ought to perform of himself: but it is not every such act that the legislator ought to compel him to perform. Every act which promises to be pernicious upon the whole to the community (himself included) each individual ought to abstain from of him: but it is not every such act that the legislator ought to compel him to abstain from.

 Where then is the line to be drawn?—We shall not have far to seek for it. The business is to give an idea of the cases in which ethics ought, and in which legislation ought not (in a direct manner at least) to interfere. If legislation interferes in a direct manner, it must be by punishment.
124
 Now the cases in which punishment, meaning the punishment of the political sanction, ought not to be inflicted, have been already stated.
125
 If then there be any of these cases in which, although legislation ought not, private ethics does or ought to interfere, these cases will serve to point out the limits between the two arts or branches of science. These cases, it may be remembered, are of four sorts: 1. Where punishment would be groundless. 2. Where it would be inefficacious. 3. Where it would be unprofitable. 4. Where it would be needless. Let us look over all these cases, and see whether in any of them there is room for the interference of private ethics, at the same time that there is none for the direct interference of legislation.

 1. First then, as to the cases where punishment would be groundless. In these cases it is evident, that the restrictive interference of ethics would be groundless too. It is because, upon the whole, there is no evil in the act, that legislation ought not to endeavour to prevent it. No more, for the same reason, ought private ethics.

 2. As to the cases in which punishment would be inefficacious. These, we may observe, may be divided into two sets or classes. The first do not depend at all upon the nature of the act: they turn only upon a defect in the timing of the punishment. The punishment in question is no more than what, for any thing that appears, ought to have been applied to the act in question. It ought, however, to have been applied at a different time; viz. not till after it had been properly denounced. These are the cases of an ex-post-facto law; of a judicial sentence beyond the law; and of a law not sufficiently promulgated. The acts here in question then might, for anything that appears, come properly under the department even of coercive legislation: of course do they under that of private ethics. As to the other set of cases, in which punishment would be inefficacious; neither do these depend upon the nature of the act, that is, of the sort of act: they turn only upon some extraneous circumstances, with which an act of any sort may chance to be accompanied. These, however, are of such a nature as not only to exclude the application of legal punishment, but in general to leave little room for the influence of private ethics. These are the cases where the will could not be deterred from any act, even by the extraordinary force of artificial punishment: as in the cases of extreme infancy, insanity, and perfect intoxication: of course, therefore, it could not by such slender and precarious force as could be applied by private ethics. The case is in this respect the same, under the circumstances of unintentionality with respect to the event of the action, unconsciousness with regard to the circumstances, and mis-supposal with regard to the existence of circumstances which have not existed; as also where the force, even of extraordinary punishment, is rendered inoperative by the superior force of a physical danger or threatened mischief. It is evident, that in these cases, if the thunders of the law prove impotent, the whispers of simple morality can have but little influence.

 3. As to the cases where punishment would be unprofitable. These are the cases which constitute the great field for the exclusive interference of private ethics. When a punishment is unprofitable, or in other words too expensive, it is because the evil of the punishment exceeds that of the offence. Now the evil of the punishment, we may remember,
126
 is distinguishable into four branches: 1. The evil of coercion, including constraint or restraint, according as the act commanded is of the positive kind or the negative. 2. The evil of apprehension. 3. The evil of sufferance. 4. The derivative evils resulting to persons in connection with those by whom the three above-mentioned original evils are sustained. Now with respect to those original evils, the persons who lie exposed to them may be two very different sets of persons. In the first place, persons who may have actually committed, or been prompted to commit, the acts really meant to be prohibited. In the next place, persons who may have performed, or been prompted to perform, such other acts as they fear may be in danger of being involved in the punishment designed only for the former. But of these two sets of acts, it is the former only that are pernicious: it is, therefore, the former only that it can be the business of private ethics to endeavour to prevent. The latter being by the supposition not mischievous, to prevent them is what it can no more be the business of ethics to endeavour at, than of legislation. It remains to show how it may happen, that there should be acts really pernicious, which, although they may very properly come under the censure of private ethics, may yet be no fit objects for the legislator to control.

 Punishment then, as applied to delinquency, may be unprofitable in both or either of two ways: 1. By the expense it would amount to, even supposing the application of it to be confined altogether to delinquency: 2. By the danger there may be of its involving the innocent in the fate designed only for the guilty. First then, with regard to the cases in which the expense of the punishment, as applied to the guilty, would outweigh the profit to be made by it. These cases, it is evident, depend upon a certain proportion between the evil of the punishment and the evil of the offence. Now were the offence of such a nature, that a punishment which, in point of magnitude, should but just exceed the profit of it, would be sufficient to prevent it, it might be rather difficult perhaps to find an instance in which such punishment would clearly appear to be unprofitable. But the fact is, there are many cases in which a punishment, in order to have any chance of being efficacious, must, in point of magnitude, be raised a great deal above that level. Thus it is, wherever the danger of detection is, or, what comes to the same thing, is likely to appear to be, so small, as to make the punishment appear in a high degree uncertain. In this case it is necessary, as has been shown,
127
 if punishment be at all applied, to raise it in point of magnitude as much as it falls short in point of certainty. It is evident, however, that all this can be but guess-work: and that the effect of such a proportion will be rendered precarious, by a variety of circumstances: by the want of sufficient promulgation on the part of the law:
128
 by the particular circumstances of the temptation:
129
 and by the circumstances influencing the sensibility of the several individuals who are exposed to it.
130
 Let the seducing motives be strong, the offence then will at any rate be frequently committed. Now and then indeed, owing to a coincidence of circumstances more or less extraordinary, it will be detected, and by that means punished. But for the purpose of example, which is the principal one, an act of punishment, considered in itself, is of no use: what use it can be of, depends altogether upon the expectation it raises of similar punishment, in future cases of similar delinquency. But this future punishment, it is evident, must always depend upon detection. If then the want of detection is such as must in general (especially to eyes fascinated by the force of the seducing motives) appear too improbable to be reckoned upon, the punishment, though it should be inflicted, may come to be of no use. Here then will be two opposite evils running on at the same time, yet neither of them reducing the quantum of the other: the evil of the disease and the evil of the painful and inefficacious remedy. It seems to be partly owing to some such considerations, that fornication, for example, or the illicit commerce between the sexes, has commonly either gone altogether unpunished, or been punished in a degree inferior to that in which, on other accounts, legislators might have been disposed to punish it.

 Secondly, with regard to the cases in which political punishment, as applied to delinquency, may be unprofitable, in virtue of the danger there may be of its involving the innocent in the fate designed only for the guilty. Whence should this danger then arise? From the difficulty there may be of fixing the idea of the guilty action: that is, of subjecting it to such a definition as shall be clear and precise enough to guard effectively against misapplication. This difficulty may arise from either of two sources: the one permanent, to wit, the nature of the actions themselves: the other occasional, I mean the qualities of the men who may have to deal with those actions in the way of government. In as far as it arises from the latter of these sources, it may depend partly upon the use which the legislator may be able to make of language; partly upon the use which, according to the apprehension of the legislators the judge may be disposed to make of it. As far as legislation is concerned, it will depend upon the degree of perfection to which the arts of language may have been carried, in the first place, in the nation in general; in the next place, by the legislator in particular. It is to a sense of this difficulty, as it should seem, that we may attribute the caution with which most legislators have abstained from subjecting to censure, on the part of the law, such actions as come under the notion of rudeness, for example, or treachery, or ingratitude. The attempt to bring acts of so vague and questionable a nature under the control of law, will argue either a very immature age, in which the difficulties which give birth to that danger are not descried; or a very enlightened age, in which they are overcome.
131

 For the sake of obtaining the clearer idea of the limits between the art of legislation and private ethics, it may now be time to call to mind the distinctions above established with regard to ethics in general. The degree in which private ethics stands in need of the assistance of legislation is different in the three branches of duty above distinguished. Of the rules of moral duty, those which seem to stand least in need of the assistance of legislation are the rules of prudence. It can only be through some defect on the part of the understanding, if a man be ever deficient in point of duty to himself. If he does wrong, there is nothing else that it can be owing to but either some inadvertence or some mis-supposal
132
 with regard to the circumstances on which his happiness depends. It is a standing topic of complaint, that a man knows too little of himself. Be it so: but is it so certain that the legislator must know more?
133
 It is plain, that of individuals the legislator can know nothing: concerning those points of conduct which depend upon the particular circumstances of each individual, it is plain, therefore, that he can determine nothing to advantage. It is only with respect to those broad lines of conduct in which all persons, or very large and permanent descriptions of persons, may be in a way to engage, that he can have any pretense for interfering; and even here the propriety of his interference will, in most instances, lie very open to dispute. At any rate, he must never expect to produce a perfect compliance by the mere force of the sanction of which he is himself the author. All he can hope to do, is to increase the efficacy of private ethics, by giving strength and direction to the influence of the moral sanction. With what chance of success, for example, would a legislator go about to extirpate drunkenness and fornication by dint of legal punishment? Not all the tortures which ingenuity could invent would compass it: and, before he had made any progress worth regarding, such a mass of evil would be produced by the punishment, as would exceed, a thousand-fold, the utmost possible mischief of the offence. The great difficulty would be in the procuring evidence; an object which could not be attempted, with any probability of success, without spreading dismay through every family,
134
 tearing the bonds of sympathy asunder,
135
 and rooting out the influence of all the social motives. All that he can do then, against offences of this nature, with any prospect of advantage, in the way of direct legislation, is to subject them, in cases of notoriety, to a slight censure, so as thereby to cover them with a slight shade of artificial disrepute.

 It may be observed, that with regard to this branch of duty, legislators have, in general, been disposed to carry their interference full as far as is expedient. The great difficulty here is, to persuade them to confine themselves within bounds. A thousand little passions and prejudices have led them to narrow the liberty of the subject in this line, in cases in which the punishment is either attended with no profit at all, or with none that will make up for the expense.

 The mischief of this sort of interference is more particularly conspicuous in the article of religion. The reasoning, in this case, is of the following stamp. There are certain errors, in matters of belief, to which all mankind are prone: and for these errors in judgment, it is the determination of a Being of infinite benevolence, to punish them with an infinity of torments. But from these errors the legislator himself is necessarily free: for the men, who happen to be at hand for him to consult with, being men perfectly enlightened, unfettered, and unbiased, have such advantages over all the rest of the world, that when they sit down to enquire out the truth relative to points so plain and so familiar as those in question, they cannot fail to find it. This being the case, when the sovereign sees his people ready to plunge headlong into an abyss of fire, shall he not stretch out a hand to save them? Such, for example, seems to have been the train of reasoning, and such the motives, which led Lewis the XIVth into those coercive measures which he took for the conversion of heretics and the confirmation of true believers. The ground-work, pure sympathy and loving-kindness: the superstructure, all the miseries which the most determined malevolence could have devised.
136
 But of this more fully in another place.
137

 The rules of probity are those, which in point of expediency stand most in need of assistance on the part of the legislator, and in which, in point of fact, his interference has been most extensive. There are few cases in which it would be expedient to punish a man for hurting himself: but there are few cases, if any, in which it would not be expedient to punish a man for injuring his neighbour. With regard to that branch of probity which is opposed to offences against property, private ethics depends in a manner for its very existence upon legislation. Legislation must first determine what things are to be regarded as each man's property, before the general rules of ethics, on this head, can have any particular application. The case is the same with regard to offences against the state. Without legislation there would be no such thing as a state: no particular persons invested with powers to be exercised for the benefit of the rest. It is plain, therefore, that in this branch the interference of the legislator cannot any where be dispensed with. We must first know what are the dictates of legislation, before we can know what are the dictates of private ethics.
138

 As to the rules of beneficence, these, as far as concerns matters of detail, must necessarily be abandoned in great measure to the jurisdiction of private ethics. In many cases the beneficial quality of the act depends essentially upon the disposition of the agent; that is, upon the motive by which he appears to have been prompted to perform it: upon their belonging to the head of sympathy, love of amity, or love of reputation; and not to any head of self-regarding motives, brought into play by the force of political constraint: in a word, upon their being such as denominate his conduct free and voluntary, according to one of the many senses given to those ambiguous expressions.
139
 The limits of the law on this head seem, however, to be capable of being extended a good deal farther than they seem ever to have been extended hitherto. In particular, in cases where the person is in danger, why should it not be made the duty of every man to save another from mischief, when it can be done without prejudicing himself, as well as to abstain from bringing it on him? This accordingly is the idea pursued in the body of the work.
140

 To conclude this section, let us recapitulate and bring to a point the difference between private ethics, considered as an art or science, on the one hand, and that branch of jurisprudence which contains the art or science of legislation, on the other. Private ethics teaches how each man may dispose himself to pursue the course most conducive to his own happiness, by means of such motives as offer of themselves: the art of legislation (which may be considered as one branch of the science of jurisprudence) teaches how a multitude of men, composing a community, may be disposed to pursue that course which upon the whole is the most conducive to the happiness of the whole community, by means of motives to be applied by the legislator.

We come now to exhibit the limits between penal and civil jurisprudence. For this purpose it may be of use to give a distinct though summary view of the principal branches into which jurisprudence, considered in its utmost extent, is wont to be divided.

&sect; 2.
Jurisprudence, its branches.
 Jurisprudence is a fictitious entity: nor can any meaning be found for the word, but by placing it in company with some word that shall be significative of a real entity. To know what is meant by jurisprudence, we must know, for example, what is meant by a book of jurisprudence. A book of jurisprudence can have but one or the other of two objects: 1. To ascertain what the law
141
 is: 2. to ascertain what it ought to be. In the former case it may be styled a book of expositoryjurisprudence; in the latter, a book of censorialjurisprudence: or, in other words, a book on the art of legislation.

 A book of expository jurisprudence, is either authoritative or unauthoritative. It is styled authoritative, when it is composed by him who, by representing the state of the law to be so and so, causeth it so to be; that is, of the legislator himself: unauthoritative, when it is the work of any other person at large.

 Now law, or the law, taken indefinitely, is an abstract and collective term; which, when it means any thing, can mean neither more nor less than the sum total of a number of individual laws taken together.
142
 It follows, that of whatever other modifications the subject of a book of jurisprudence is susceptible, they must all of them be taken from some circumstance or other of which such individual laws, or the assemblages into which they may be sorted, are susceptible. The circumstances that have given rise to the principal branches of jurisprudence we are wont to hear of, seem to be as follows: 1. The extent of the laws in question in point of dominion. 2. The political quality of the persons whose conduct they undertake to regulate. 3. The time of their being in force. 4. The manner in which they are expressed. 5. The concern which they have with the article of punishment.

 In the first place, in point of extent, what is delivered concerning the laws in question, may have reference either to the laws of such or such a nation or nations in particular, or to the laws of all nations whatsoever: in the first case, the book may be said to relate to local, in the other, to universal jurisprudence.

Now of the infinite variety of nations there are upon the earth, there are no two which agree exactly in their laws: certainly not in the whole: perhaps not even in any single article: and let them agree today, they would disagree to-morrow. This is evident enough with regard to the substance of the laws: and it would be still more extraordinary if they agreed in point of form; that is, if they were conceived in precisely the same strings of words. What is more, as the languages of nations are commonly different, as well as their laws, it is seldom that, strictly speaking, they have so much as a single word in common. However, among the words that are appropriated to the subject of law, there are some that in all languages are pretty exactly correspondent to one another: which comes to the same thing nearly as if they were the same. Of this stamp, for example, are those which correspond to the words power, right, obligation, liberty, and many others.

It follows, that if there are any books which can, properly speaking, be styled books of universal jurisprudence, they must be looked for within very narrow limits. Among such as are expository, there can be none that are authoritative: nor even, as far as the substance of the laws is concerned, any that are unauthoritative. To be susceptible of an universal application, all that a book of the expository kind can have to treat of, is the import of words: to be, strictly speaking, universal, it must confine itself to terminology. Accordingly the definitions which there has been occasion here and there to intersperse in the course of the present work, and particularly the definition hereafter given of the word law, may be considered as matter belonging to the head of universal jurisprudence. Thus far in strictness of speech: though in point of usage, where a man, in laying down what he apprehends to be the law, extends his views to a few of the nations with which his own is most connected, it is common enough to consider what he writes as relating to universal jurisprudence.

It is in the censorial line that there is the greatest room for disquisitions that apply to the circumstances of all nations alike: and in this line what regards the substance of the laws in question is as susceptible of an universal application, as what regards the words. That the laws of all nations, or even of any two nations, should coincide in all points, would be as ineligible as it is impossible: some leading points, however, there seem to be, in respect of which the laws of all civilized nations might, without inconvenience, be the same. To mark out some of these points will, as far as it goes, be the business of the body of this work.

 In the second place, with regard to the political quality of the persons whose conduct is the object of the law. These may, on any given occasion, be considered either as members of the same state, or as members of different states: in the first ease, the law may be referred to the head of internal, in the second case, to that of international
143
 jurisprudence.

Now as to any transactions which may take place between individuals who are subjects of different states, these are regulated by the internal laws, and decided upon by the internal tribunals, of the one or the other of those states: the case is the same where the sovereign of the one has any immediate transactions with a private member of the other: the sovereign reducing himself, pro re natâ, to the condition of a private person, as often as he submits his cause to either tribunal; whether by claiming a benefit, or defending himself against a burthen. There remain then the mutual transactions between sovereigns, as such, for the subject of that branch of jurisprudence which may be properly and exclusively termed international.
144

With what degree of propriety rules for the conduct of persons of this description can come under the appellation of laws, is a question that must rest till the nature of the thing called a law shall have been more particularly unfolded.

It is evident enough, that international jurisprudence may, as well as internal, be censorial as well as expository, unauthoritative as well as authoritative.

 Internal jurisprudence, again, may either concern all the members of a state indiscriminately, or such of them only as are connected in the way of residence, or otherwise, with a particular district. Jurisprudence is accordingly sometimes distinguished into national and provincial. But as the epithet provincial is hardly applicable to districts so small as many of those which have laws of their own are wont to be, such as towns, parishes, and manors; the term local (where universal jurisprudence is plainly out of the question) or the term particular, though this latter is not very characteristic, might either of them be more commodious.
145

 Thirdly, with respect to time. In a work of the expository kind, the laws that are in question may either be such as are still in force at the time when the book is writing, or such as have ceased to be in force. In the latter case the subject of it might be termed ancient; in the former, present or living jurisprudence: that is, if the substantive jurisprudence, and no other, must at any rate be employed, and that with an epithet in both cases. But the truth is, that a book of the former kind is rather a book of history than a book of jurisprudence; and, if the word jurisprudence be expressive of the subject, it is only with some such words as history or antiquities prefixed. And as the laws which are any where in question are supposed, if nothing appears to the contrary, to be those which are in force, no such epithet as that of present or living commonly appears.

Where a book is so circumstanced, that the laws which form the subject of it, though in force at the time of its being written, are in force no longer, that book is neither a book of living jurisprudence, nor a book on the history of jurisprudence: it is no longer the former, and it never was the latter. It is evident that, owing to the changes which from time to time must take place, in a greater or less degree, in every body of laws, every book of jurisprudence, which is of an expository nature, must in the course of a few years, come to partake more or less of this condition.

The most common and most useful object of a history of jurisprudence, is to exhibit the circumstances that have attended the establishment of laws actually in force. But the exposition of the dead laws which have been superseded, is inseparably interwoven with that of the living ones which have superseded them. The great use of both these branches of science, is to furnish examples for the art of legislation.
146

 Fourthly, in point of expression, the laws in question may subsist either in the form of statute or in that of customary law.

As to the difference between these two branches (which respects only the article of form or expression) it cannot properly be made appear till some progress has been made in the definition of a law.

 Lastly, The most intricate distinction of all, and that which comes most frequently on the carpet, is that which is made between the civil branch of jurisprudence and the penal, which latter is wont, in certain circumstances, to receive the name of criminal.

What is a penal code of laws? What a civil code? Of what nature are their contents? Is it that there are two sorts of laws, the one penal the other civil, so that the laws in a penal code are all penal laws, while the laws in a civil code are all civil laws? Or is it, that in every law there is some matter which is of a penal nature, and which therefore belongs to the penal code; and at the same time other matter which is of a civil nature, and which therefore belongs to the civil code? Or is it, that some laws belong to one code or the other exclusively, while others are divided between the two? To answer these questions in any manner that shall be tolerably satisfactory, it will be necessary to ascertain what a law is; meaning one entire but single law: and what are the parts into which a law, as such, is capable of being distinguished: or, in other words, to ascertain what the properties are that are to be found in every object which can with propriety receive the appellation of a law. This then will be the business of the third and fourth sections: what concerns the import of the word criminal, as applied to law, will be discussed separately in the fifth.

Here ends the original work, in the state into which it was brought in 5 November, 1780. What follows is now added in January, 1789.

The third, fourth, and fifth sections intended, as expressed in the text, to have been added to this chapter, will not here, nor now be given; because to give them in a manner tolerably complete and satisfactory, might require a considerable volume. This volume will form a work of itself, closing the series of works mentioned in the preface.

What follows here may serve to give a slight intimation of the nature of the task, which such a work will have to achieve: it will at the same time furnish, not any thing like a satisfactory answer to the questions mentioned in the text, but a slight and general indication of the course to be taken for giving them such an answer.

What is a law? What the parts of a law? The subject of these questions it is to be observed, is the logical, the ideal, the intellectual whole not the physical one: the law, and not the statute. An enquiry, directed to the latter sort of object, could neither admit of difficulty nor afford instruction. In this sense whatever is given for law by the person or persons recognized as possessing the power of making laws, is law. The Metamorphoses of Ovid, if thus given, would be law. So much as was embraced by one and the same act of authentication, so much as received the touch of the sceptre at one stroke, is one law: a whole law, and nothing more. A statute of George  made to substitute an or instead of an and in a former statute is a complete law; a statute containing an entire body of laws, perfect in all its parts, would not be more so. By the word law then, as often as it occurs in the succeeding pages is meant that ideal object, of which the part, the whole, or the multiple, or an assemblage of parts, wholes, and multiples mixed together, is exhibited by a statute; not the statute which exhibits them.

Every law, when complete, is either of a coercive or an uncoercive nature.

A coercive law is a command.

An uncoercive, or rather a discoercive, law is the revocation, in whole or in part, of a coercive law.

What has been termed a declaratory law, sofar as it stands distinguished from either a coercive or a discoercive law, is not properly speaking a law. It is not the expression of an act of the will exercised at the time: it is a mere notification of the existence of a law, either of the coercive or the discoercive kind, as already subsisting: of the existence of some document expressive of some act of the will, exercised, not at the time, but at some former period. If it does any thing more than give information of this fact, viz. of the prior existence of a law of either the coercive or the discoercive kind, it ceases pro tanto to be what is meant by a declaratory law, and assuming either the coercive or the discoercive quality.

Every coercive law creates an offence, that is, converts an act of some sort, or other into an offence. It is only by so doing that it can impose obligation, that it can produce coercion.

A law confining itself to the creation of an offence, and a law commanding a punishment to be administered in case of the commission of such an offence, are two distinct laws, not parts (as they seem to have been generally accounted hitherto) of one and the same law. The acts they command are altogether different; the persons they are addressed to are altogether different. Instance, Let no man steal; and, Let the judge cause whoever is convicted of stealing to be hanged.

They might be styled, the former, a simply imperative law; the other a punitory: but the punitory, if it commands the punishment to be inflicted, and does not merely permit it, is as truly imperative as the other: only it is punitory besides, which the other is not.

A law of the discoercive kind, considered in itself, can have no punitory law belonging to it: to receive the assistance and support of a punitory in law, it must flrst receive that of a simply imperative or coercive law, and it is to this latter that the punitory law will attach itself, and not to the discoercive one. Example, discoercive law. The sheriff has power to hang all such as the judge, proceeding in due course of law, shall order him to hang. Example of a coercive law, made in support of the above discoereive one. Let no man hinder the sheriff from hanging such as the judge, proceeding in due course of law, shall order him to hang. Example of a punitory law, made in support of the above coercive one. Let the judge cause to be imprisoned whosoever attempts to hinder the sheriff from hanging one, whom the judge, proceeding in due course of law, has ordered him to hang.

But though a simply imperative law, and the punitory law attached to it, are so far distinct laws, that the former contains nothing of the latter, and the latter, in its direct tenor, contains nothing of the former; yet by implication, and that a necessary one, the punitory does involve and include the import of the simply imperative law to which it is appended. To say to the judge Cause to be hanged whoever in due form of law is convicted of stealing, is, though not a direct, yet as intelligible a way of intimating to men in general that they must not steal, as to say to them directly, Do not steal: and one sees, how much more likely to be efficacious.

It should seem then, that, wherever a simply imperative law is to have a punitory one appended to it, the former might be spared altogether: in, which case, saving the exception (which naturally should seem not likely to be a frequent one) of a law capable of answering its purpose without such an appendage, there should be no occasion in the whole body of the law for any other than punitory, or in other words than penal, laws. And this, perhaps, would be the case, were it not for the necessity of a large quantity of matter of the expository kind, of which we come now to speak.

It will happen in the instance of many, probably of most, possibly of all commands endued with the force of a public law, that, in the expression given to such a command it shall be necessary to have recourse to terms too complex in their signification to exhibit the requisite ideas, without the assistance of a greater or less quantity of matter of an expository nature. Such terms, like the symbols used in algebraical notation, are rather substitutes and indexes to the terms capable of themselves of exhibiting the ideas in question, than the real and immediate representatives of those ideas.

Take for instance the law, Thou shalt not steal. Such a command, were it to rest there, could never sufficiently answer the purpose of a law. A word of so vague and unexplicit a meaning cannot otherwise perform this office, than by giving a general intimation of a variety of propositions, each requiring, to convey it to the apprehension, a more particular and ample assemblage of terms. Stealing, for example (according to a definition not accurate enough for use, but sufficiently so for the present purpose), is the taking of a thing which is another's, by one who has no TITLE so to do, and is conscious of his having none. Even after this exposition, supposing it a correct one, can the law be regarded as completely expressed? Certainly not. For what is meant by a man's having a TITLE to take a thing? To be complete, the law must have exhibited, amongst a multitude of other things, two catalogues: the one of events to which it has given the quality of conferring title in such a case; the other of the events to which it has given the quality of taking it away. What follows? That for a man to have stolen, for a man to have had no title to what he took, either no one of the articles contained in the first of those lists must have happened in his favour, or if there has, some one of the number of those contained in the second must have happened to his prejudice.

Such then is the nature of a general law, that while the imperative part of it, the punctum saliens as it may be termed, of this artificial body, shall not take up above two or three words, its expository appendage, without which that imperative part could not rightly perform its office, may occupy a considerable volume.

But this may equally be the case with a private order given in a family. Take for instance one from a bookseller to his foreman. Remove, from this shop to my new one, my whole stock, according to this printed catalogue.—Remove, from this shop to my new one, my whole stock, is the imperative matter of this order; the catalogue referred to contains the expository appendage.

The same mass of expository matter may serve in common for, may appertain in common to, many commands, many masses of imperative matter. Thus, amongst other things, the catalogue of collative and ablative events, with respect to titles above spoken of (see No.  of this note), will belong in common to all or most of the laws constitutive of the various offences against property. Thus, in mathematical diagrams, one and the same base shall serve for a whole cluster of triangles.

Such expository matter, being of a complexion so different from the imperative it would be no wonder if the connection of the former with the latter should escape the observation: which, indeed, is perhaps pretty generally the case. And so long as any mass of legislative matter presents itself, which is not itself imperative or the contrary, or of which the connection with matter of one of those two descriptions is not apprehended, so long and so far the truth of the proposition, That every law is a command or its opposite, may remain unsuspected, or appear questionable; so long also may the incompleteness of the greater part of those masses of legislative matter, which wear the complexion of complete laws upon the face of them, also the method to be taken for rendering them really complete, remain undiscovered.

A circumstance, that will naturally contribute to increase the difficulty of the discovery, is the great variety of ways in which the operation of a law may be conveyed—the great variety of forms which the imperative part of a law may indiscriminately assume: some more directly, some less directly expressive of the imperative quality. Thou shalt not steal. Let no man steal. Whoso stealeth shall be punished so and so. If any man steal, he shall be punished so and so. Stealing is where a man does so and so; the punishment for stealing is so and so. To judges so and so named, and so and so constituted, belong the cognizance of such and such offences; viz. stealing—and so on. These are but part of a multitude of forms of words, in any of which the command by which stealing is prohibited might equally be couched: and it is manifest to what a degree, in some of them, the imperative quality is clouded and concealed from ordinary apprehension.

After this explanation, a general proposition or two, that may be laid down, may help to afford some little insight into the structure and contents of a complete body of laws.—So many different sorts of offences created, so many different laws of the coercive kind: so many exceptions taken out of the descriptions of those offences, so many laws of the discoercive kind.

To class offences, as hath been attempted to be done in the preceding chapter, is therefore to class laws: to exhibit a complete catalogue of all the offences created by law, including the whole mass of expository matter necessary for fixing and exhibiting the import of the terms contained in the several laws, by which those offences are respectively created, would be to exhibit a complete collection of the laws in force: in a word a complete body of law; a pannomion, if so it might be termed.

From the obscurity in which the limits of a law, and the distinction betwixt a law of the civil or simply imperative kind and a punitory law, are naturally involved, results the obscurity of the limits betwixt a civil and a penal code, betwixt a civil branch of the law and the penal.

The question, What parts of the total mass of legislative matter belong to the civil branch, and what to the penal? supposes that divers political states, or at least that some one such state, are to be found, having as well a civil code as a penal code, each of them complete in its kind, and marked out by certain limits. But no one such state has ever yet existed.

To put a question to which a true answer can be given, we must substitute to the foregoing question some such a one as that which follows:

Suppose two masses of legislative matter to be drawn up at this time of day, the one under the name of a civil code, the other of a penal code, each meant to be complete in its kind—in what general way, is it natural to suppose, that the different sorts of matter, as above distinguished, would be distributed between them?

To this question the following answer seems likely to come as near as any other to the truth.

The civil code would not consist of a collection of civil laws, each complete in itself, as well as clear of all penal ones:

Neither would the penal code (since we have seen that it could not) consist of a collection of punitive laws, each not only complete in itself, but clear of all civil ones. But

The civil code would consist chiefly of mere masses of expository matter. The imperative matter, to which those masses of expository matter respectively appertained, would be found—not in that same code—not in the civil code—nor in a pure state, free from all admixture of punitory laws; but in the penal code—in a state of combination—involved, in manner as above explained, in so many correspondent punitory laws.

The penal code then would consist principally of punitive laws, involving the imperative matter of the whole number of civil laws: along with which would probably also be found various masses of expository matter, appertaining not to the civil, but to the punitory laws. The body of penal law enacted by the Empress-Queen Maria Theresa, agrees pretty well with this account.

The mass of legislative matter published in French as well as German, under the auspices of Frederic  of Prussia, by the name of Code Frederic, but never established with force of law,
147
 appears, for example, to be almost wholly composed of masses of expository matter, the relation of which to any imperative matter appears to have been but very imperfectly apprehended.

In that enormous mass of confusion and inconsistency, the ancient Roman, or, as it is termed by way of eminence, the civil law, the imperative matter, and even all traces of the imperative character, seem at last to have been smothered in the expository. Esto had been the language of primæval simplicity: esto had been the language of the twelve tables. By the time of Justinian (so thick was the darkness raised by clouds of commentators) the penal law had been crammed into an odd corner of the civil—the whole catalogue of offences, and even of crimes, lay buried under a heap of obligations—will was hid in opinion—and the original esto had transformed itself into videtur, in the mouths even of the most despotic sovereigns.

Among the barbarous nations that grew up out of the ruins of the Roman Empire, Law, emerging from under the mountain of expository rubbish, reassumed for a while the language of command: and then she had simplicity at least, if nothing else, to recommend her.

Besides the civil and the penal, every complete body of law must contain a third branch, the constitutional.

The constitutional branch is chiefly employed in conferring, on particular classes of persons, powers, to be exercised for the good of the whole society, or of considerable parts of it, and prescribing duties to the persons invested with those powers.

The powers are principally constituted, in the first instance, by discoercive or permissive laws operating as exceptions to certain laws of the coercive or imperative kind. Instance: A tax-gatherer, as such, may, on such and such an occasion, take such and such things, without any other TITLE.

The duties are created by imperative laws, addressed to the persons on whom the powers are conferred. Instance: On such and such an occasion, such and such a tax-gatherer shall take such and such things. Such and such a judge shall, in such and such a case, cause persons so and so offending to be hanged.

The parts which perform the function of indicating who the individuals are, who, in every case, shall be considered as belonging to those classes, have neither a permissive complexion, nor an imperative.

They are so many masses of expository matter, appertaining in common to all laws, into the texture of which, the names of those classes of persons have occasion to be inserted. Instance; imperative matter:—Let the judge cause whoever, in due course of law, is convicted of stealing, to be hanged. Nature of the expository matter:—Who is the person meant by the word judge? He who has been invested with that office in such a manner: and in respect of whom no event has happened, of the number of those, to which the effect is given, of reducing him to the condition of one divested of that office.

Thus it is, that one and the same law, one and the same command, will have its matter divided, not only between two great codes, or main branches of the whole body of the laws, the civil and the penal; but amongst three such branches, the civil, the penal and the constitutional.

In countries, where a great part of the law exists in no other shape, than that of which in England is called common law but might be more expressively termed judiciary, there must be a great multitude of laws, the import of which cannot be sufficiently made out for practice, without referring to this common law, for more or less of the expository matter belonging to them. Thus in England the exposition of the word title, that basis of the of whole fabric of the laws of property, is nowhere else to be found. And, as uncertainty is of the very essence of every particle of law so denominated (for the instant it is clothed in a certain authoritative form of words it changes its nature, and passes over to the other denomination) hence it is that a great part of the laws in being in such countries remain uncertain and incomplete. What are those countries? To this hour, every one on the surface of the globe.

Had the science of architecture no fixed nomenclature belonging to it—were there no settled names for distinguishing the different sorts of buildings nor the different parts of the same building from each other—what would it be? It would be what the science of legislation, considered with respect to its form, remains at present.

Were there no architects who could distinguish a dwelling-house from a barn, or a side-wall from a ceiling, what would architects be? They would be what all legislators are at present.

From this very slight and imperfect sketch, may be collected not an answer to the questions in the text but an intimation, and that but an imperfect one, of the course to be taken for giving such an answer; and, at any rate, some idea of the difficulty, as well as of the necessity, of the task.

If it were thought necessary to recur to experience for proofs of this difficulty, and this necessity, they need not be long wanting.

Take, for instance, so many well-meant endeavours on the part of popular bodies, and so many well-meant recommendations in ingenious books, to restrain supreme representative assemblies from making laws in such and such cases, or to such and such an effect. Such laws, to answer the intended purpose, require a perfect mastery in the science of law considered in respect of its form—in the sort of anatomy spoken of in the preface to this work: but a perfect, or even a moderate insight into that science, would prevent their being couched in those loose and inadequate terms, in which they may be observed so frequently to be conceived; as a perfect acquaintance with the dictates of utility on that head would, in many, if not in most, of those instances, discounsel the attempt. Keep to the letter, and in attempting to prevent the making of bad laws, you will find them prohibiting the making of the most necessary laws, perhaps even of all laws: quit the letter, and they express no more than if each man were to say, Your laws shall become ipso facto void, as often as they contain any thing which is not to my mind.

Of such unhappy attempts, examples may be met with in the legislation of many nations: but in none more frequently than in that newly-created nation, one of the most enlightened, if not the most enlightened, at this day on the globe.

Take for instance the Declaration of Rights, enacted by the State of North Carolina, in convention, in or about the month of September, 1788, and said to be copied, with a small exception, from one in like manner enacted by the State of Virginia.
148

The following, to go no farther, is the first and fundamental article:

'That there are certain natural rights, of which men, when they form a social compact, cannot deprive or divest their posterity, among which are the enjoyment of life and liberty, with the means of acquiring, possessing and protecting property, and pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety.'

Not to dwell on the oversight of confining to posterity the benefit of the rights thus declared, what follows? That—as against those whom the protection, thus meant to be afforded, includes—every law, or other order, divesting a man of the enjoyment of life or liberty, is void.

Therefore this is the case, amongst others, with every coercive law.

Therefore, as against the persons thus protected, every order, for example, to pay money on the score of taxation, or of debt from individual to individual, or otherwise, is void: for the effect of it, if complied with, is to 'deprive and divest him,' pro tanto, of the enjoyment of liberty, viz. the liberty of paying or not paying as he thinks proper: not to mention the species opposed to imprisonment, in the event of such a mode of coercion's being resorted to: likewise of property, which is itself a 'means of acquiring, possessing and protecting property, and of pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety.'

Therefore also, as against such persons, every order to attack an armed enemy, in time of war, is also void: for, the necessary effect of such an order is to 'deprive some of them of the enjoyment of life.'

The above-mentioned consequences may suffice for examples, amongst an endless train of similar ones.
149

Leaning on his elbow, in an attitude of profound and solemn meditation, 'What a multitude of things there are' (exclaimed the dancing-master Marcel) 'in a minuet!'—May we now add?—and in a law.